<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoiren einer Grossmutter, Band I, by Pauline Wengeroff</title>
    <link href="2374999066869219076_cover.jpg" rel="icon" type="image/x-cover" id="id-4842919488832466141"/>
    <link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.8 by Project Gutenberg"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="center">
      <div class="poem" style="display: inline-block;">
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">The Jew, the Jew, a wondrous thing,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">Regard him with reverence, do not hold him in low esteem!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">He belongs to the smallest of peoples,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">Yet here and there one can meet him.<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">Always climb to the heights, you will encounter him,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">Sink down to the depths, you will not flee him!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">Lock yourself in castles, he will still remain near you,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">Crawl into huts, you will find him there too!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">Tortured, tormented, tormented to blood,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">He perseveres in faith, does not lose his courage!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">You believe him vanquished, stretched out on the ground,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">He rises up: He was only startled!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">But one thing his heart always tells him:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i0">Whatever you may suffer, G-d will reward your pain!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="p1">Another little song she taught us is an allegory,
a mixture in Polish and Old Hebrew. According to
the latest opinion of Jewish researchers in Russia, the
Jews in Russia spoke only Russian mixed with Hebrew,
and the same was true in Poland. This opinion is supported by
a multitude of folk songs published in the latest collection by
Saul Günzburg in Petersburg.</p>
    <p>The same thought always recurs; the allegorical
allusion is always clear, that the Jews suffer for the sins of their
ancestors, but have received the promise from G-d that He will
restore them. My mother sang these little songs with shining eyes
and assured us children with the most blessed confidence that this
promise would surely one day be fulfilled. Only in my riper years
did I understand her fervor in prayer, this genuine religiosity and
the uplifting power of a pure faith in G-d. I still see her before me,
how she stood lost in thought with closed eyes and hanging
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[94]" id="pgepubid00099"><a id="Seite_94" title="[94]"/></span>
arms, and how, rapt, detached from all small,
earthly things, she softly prayed the Shemoneh Esrei. Her
lips barely moved, but in her features lay her praying
soul! Pious submission, the awareness of sinfulness,
a plea for forgiveness, and hope for the Lord’s grace.</p>
    <p>Shabbat Nachamu brought joy into Jewish
life, and people hastened to make up for the deprivations of the
mourning period, during which marriages and other entertainments
were forbidden, and to place daughters or sons in golden chains
as quickly as possible! One could not hesitate for long, for the
month of joy was already followed by Rosh Chodesh Elul
(New Moon of September), and with the blowing and rustling of
the autumn winds and the falling of the yellowed leaves, the time
of the Shofar also began, which was blown daily throughout the
month after the early morning prayer. It called again for introspection
and contemplation, stimulated self-reproach, and repentance
for the sins committed throughout the year. Fasting, penances,
and fervent prayers to the Creator were meant to prepare for
forgiveness. And many pious deeds were practiced. In
most Jewish homes at that time, tin collection boxes with lids
were affixed to some wall, usually near the Mezuzot in the dining
room. One of these boxes was called the “Eretz Yisrael
Pushke.” The coins collected in it were intended for the
Talmudic schools in Palestine and for elderly people in Jerusalem,
who had mostly emigrated there to die on holy ground and
be buried in Palestinian soil. Indeed, this soil was attributed the power
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[95]" id="pgepubid00100"><a id="Seite_95" title="[95]"/></span>
to preserve the dead resting in it from decay, so that they would
rise from their graves in full freshness at the coming of the Messiah.
Trusting in the inherent power of the Palestinian soil,
pious Jews living in Europe had small bags of this earth
sent to them to be scattered in their graves. — It was, in any case,
the duty of the Jewish communities to support those awaiting their
death in Jerusalem until the end of their lives, and the contents of
this box, which was received annually by the Eretz-Israel-Meshulach
(messenger), also served this purpose. He traveled throughout the
country and, when he came to Brest, used to lodge with us. He was
a robust man with a dark, sun-tanned face and wise eyes. At the
table, he used to tell us much about Palestine, and we listened to
these exotic tales as if they were a fairy tale.</p>
    <p>The second box was the “Reb Meier Balhaness (Miracle Worker)
Pushke.” If someone was threatened by misfortune, in cases of
illness or other dangers, a sum of 18 kopecks, 18 rubles, or 18 ducats
was donated to this box, depending on wealth and occasion; in any
case, the value had to correspond to the number 18, because in
Hebrew letters this signifies the word chai, meaning life.</p>
    <p>For us children, the solemn days of penance did not feel
very close; on the contrary, we rejoiced in the beautiful autumn
season with the ripe fruit that we devoured in large quantities.
We received an apron full of fruit for a copper groschen, which
our mother gave us every day, and our young stomachs patiently
accepted the gifts of autumn. In our garden too, the fruits had
ripened and awaited
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[96]" id="pgepubid00101"><a id="Seite_96" title="[96]"/></span>
the picking hand, the nibbling mouths. The tree branches
hung full to breaking, and the vegetables stood tall in magnificent
colors. The cabbage ripened. My eldest sister was excellent
at making a small candle from the stalk, as if rolled from tallow.
She cleaned the stalk, rounded it off, and inserted a wood splinter,
slightly blackened with soot, into the tip, so that it looked like a
candle. Late in the evening, she would give this little candle to the
cook or the servant to light. The wood splinter would catch fire for
a moment, but soon extinguished, which annoyed the person in
question. We children watched from afar, giggling and enjoying
the successful prank. These became our joys, for we could no
longer stay outdoors for so long; it was already noticeably cool.
The days grew shorter and gloomy. We no longer went to the
Cheder so early. We often had to play in the Cheder room because
the autumn rain frequently chased us off the street.</p>
    <p>In the house, it grew quieter and quieter; the parents and adult
siblings became increasingly serious as the month of Elul drew to
a close. The concerns of the Selichot period approached. Even
before daybreak, the penitential prayers were recited. The prayers
are often so extensive that, for example, on the last day before
Rosh Hashanah (New Year), one must begin as early as midnight
to even finish. This prayer is called Zechor Brit.</p>
    <p>The New Year festival itself is considered very serious and holy,
but it is regarded as a joyful holiday. In our home, all sorts of
flatbreads were baked, jams in honey and sugar were prepared,
and the white bread was baked in the shape of rings, which is
symbolically meant to represent the round year.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[97]" id="pgepubid00102"><a id="Seite_97" title="[97]"/></span>
The women mostly wore white dresses, which were only put on for
the New Year festival and the Day of Atonement. On the eve, many
candles were lit, over which the women recited blessings; the
atmosphere, though festive, still carried a touch of sadness, a certain
seriousness over the spirits. During the evening prayer in the
synagogue, much weeping occurred. I remember that our good
father used to come home hoarse from crying. But the festive mood
soon prevailed, and my father cheerfully gave us his blessing and
performed Kiddush (blessing of the wine) in a friendly mood. We all
first poured plenty of water over our hands, then dried them, sat
silently at the table, and prayed quietly along, while father recited a
blessing over the two large loaves of bread that lay covered before
him; he cut one of them into two parts, from one part he cut a slice,
which he dipped in honey, and softly murmured a prayer. Before he
had eaten the first bite, neither he nor anyone else at the table was
allowed to speak. Then the children also received the Mauzes (the
first bites of bread) with honey, and then the rich supper was taken.
Although it only began at nine in the evening, everyone went to rest
immediately afterward, so as to be able to go to the synagogue very
early the next day. I do not remember ever seeing my mother or the
other synagogue-goers that morning, no matter how early I got up.
Everyone was already praying, and they only returned home around
one or two in the afternoon, exhausted but in an elevated mood —
such was the effect of the prayers designated for this day — the
sublime piyyut poetry, the philosophical
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[98]"><a id="Seite_98" title="[98]"/></span>
reflections on earthly, transient life, the justice and merciful
forbearance of our one G-d, “who sits on His judgment seat,” as it
says in the proverbs, “and practices justice.”</p>
    <p>“He opens the gate to him who knocks upon it with sincere
repentance, who suppresses his wrath in judgment, adorning himself
as judge with grace and mildness. He who grants atonement for all
guilt, who lets His grace prevail. He is angry for only a short time
and is great in patience. He is kind to the wicked as to the good. He
who perseveres until the transgressor piously converts.“</p>
    <p>My father used to repeat these passages of the prayer, singing,
with the young people at the table; and they wept as they did …</p>
    <p>The afternoon nap on the first day of Rosh Hashanah was omitted,
for on this holiday, more prayer than eating and sleeping was to be
done. People went to the so-called Tashlich, meaning they went to
the river, where they recited a short prayer and, as it were, shook off
their sins and cast them into the water. This custom was not taken
seriously by my father, and therefore he did not participate in it. From
the river, people returned to the synagogue, where the pre-evening
and evening prayers were recited. At home, the women again lit the
candles; father came from the synagogue, again gave us his blessing,
and performed Kiddush over the cup of wine and Shehecheyanu over
a fruit (a blessing over a fruit that one had not yet eaten during the
summer). My mother usually bought a watermelon or cantaloupe or
a pineapple for this purpose. (These fruits were very rare in our area).
After supper, which was also taken very early,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[99]" id="pgepubid00103"><a id="Seite_99" title="[99]"/></span>
everyone went to rest so that they could begin praying early in the
synagogue the next morning, which again lasted until after one
o’clock. The next day is a fast day, called Tzom Gedalia. Everyone
fasted. No one thought of grumbling, and so they tormented
themselves on the third day as well. This was followed by the Ten
Days of Repentance (Aseret Yemei Teshuvah), which fall between
Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement), and reach
their climax and end with the holy Day of Atonement.</p>
    <p>With reverent awe, I still remember Erev Yom Kippur (the eve of
the Day of Atonement) in our paternal home, when our pious parents
forgot all worldly concerns and lived only in prayer. As soon as the
previous day dawned, preparations were made to perform Kapparot.
Each man took a rooster, each woman took a hen; they held them by
their feet, and a specially designated prayer was recited. At the end,
the person praying swings the fowl three times around their head and
then casts it away; this fowl is slaughtered and eaten.</p>
    <p>The making of the Yom Kippur candle was also a sacred duty. Very
early on Erev Yom Kippur, old Gabete Sara (Gabete was the name
given to old women whose self-appointed life’s task was to undertake
pious works for the sick, the poor, and the recently deceased) arrived
with a whole packet of Tkhines — small prayer books written only for
women in Yiddish-German — and an enormously large ball of wick
thread and a large piece of wax. My mother used to eat nothing
beforehand until the candle was finished, for with an empty stomach,
every person is more inclined to weep,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[100]" id="pgepubid00104"><a id="Seite_100" title="[100]"/></span>
and their spirit is softer. My mother and the aforementioned Sara
began the work by reciting many Tkhines from the packet with fervent
weeping; only then did they take the ball of wick in hand. Sara placed
it in her apron, stood facing my mother at a distance of about a meter,
gave the end of the thread from the ball to my mother, and also pulled
it towards herself. Now my mother, with a weeping voice, began to
name all her deceased family members, recalling their good deeds,
and for each, a thread from the ball of wick thread was drawn further,
until all were mentioned and a properly thick wick was formed. In this
way, all living family members were also remembered. It was also
customary, if someone became very dangerously ill, to measure the
cemetery with the wick thread in all four directions and then use this
thread as a wick for wax candles for Yom Kippur.</p>
    <p>Half the day was still spent cheerfully, but already in a solemn mood;
according to custom, much fruit was eaten, and a hundred Brachot
(blessings) were recited. Then it was time for bathing and washing.
People dressed in white, as if to appear pure and worthy before the
eternal Judge. During the pre-evening prayer (Mincha), one must
already strike one’s breast 35 times, with tears flowing freely. The men
also had the so-called Malkot administered to their backs by the
synagogue attendant. I remember that they all came out of the
synagogue with red, tear-stained eyes, and the timely prepared supper
was taken in silent solemnity. The young people and we children were
filled with an anxious anticipation; everyone was silent under the
pressure of something inexpressible and heavy.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[101]" id="pgepubid00105"><a id="Seite_101" title="[101]"/></span>
During the table prayer, tears flowed, which no one could hold back.
After the meal, everyone took off their shoes, and the men put on their
long white kittels over their clothes. (This white kittel is the Jewish
burial shroud, in which he is buried.) A silver fabric belt and a small
silver fabric cap completed the attire, and now, with a coat over their
shoulder, they went to the synagogue; for the third time that day.
Before leaving, the father blessed each child and grandchild, even the
smallest one still in the cradle, with words full of intimacy and fervor,
and tears flowed freely down his cheeks, as well as down the cheeks of
the children upon whose heads he laid his hands. Even the household
staff came forward and stood at the threshold — everyone wept and
asked each other to “be mochel,” i.e., for forgiveness. My mother also,
with a moved voice, asked for leniency if she had offended or hurt her
subordinates during the year. This outpouring of noble feelings
ennobled the souls and gave them consecration and peace. And the
awareness that G-d would forgive sins strengthened the will to now
begin a new, purified life.</p>
    <p>All souls, of the adults who went to the synagogue for Kol Nidre,
and of the children who stayed at home, were directed heavenward.
The single thought held everyone captive, that on this evening the
great reckoning with sinful humanity would begin. In the synagogue,
brightly lit by many candles, during the solemn Kol Nidre prayer
before the open Aron Kodesh (Holy Ark) with the Sifrei Torah (holy
scrolls), with deeply moved hearts in the unanimously repentant mood
of the praying congregation, every
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[102]" id="pgepubid00106"><a id="Seite_102" title="[102]"/></span>
offense committed against one another throughout the year was
retracted, every hurt forgiven; even non-believers were forgiven every
insult and injustice. Every Jew wanted to free themselves from sin and
recognized more profoundly than usual that evening their powerlessness,
the powerlessness of man in the vast universe and before the Creator,
with the words: “We humans are in G-d’s hands like clay in the potter’s
hand…. like stone in the sculptor’s hand…. like silver in the goldsmith’s
hand…. He shapes everything according to His will.“</p>
    <p>After the parents had gone to the synagogue, we children gathered
around our eldest sister Chashe Feige, our loving protectress and
teacher. She recited the evening prayer. We stood devoutly beside her
and did not move from our spot. I heard her sobbing, and I felt so
anxious. The whole house was in deep silence, and the wax candles
crackled mysteriously. In my mind, I saw what was happening in heaven
before G-d’s throne, how the united voices of people pleaded for mercy,
and how even the angels stood in fear and terror before the Most High.
But the Lord, in His grace, examined the hearts of the righteous and
bestowed His grace upon those who sincerely repented of the sins they
had committed.</p>
    <p>At nine o’clock, she told us to go to bed. But our hearts were so heavy
that we asked her to sit with us. And she sat there until we fell asleep.</p>
    <p>The following day, the mood of the synagogue-goers was even more
serious, completely detached from worldly matters; on the Day of
Judgment, on the great, holy Yom Kippur, the prayers are of a solemn
earnestness. G-d the Lord
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[103]" id="pgepubid00107"><a id="Seite_103" title="[103]"/></span>
Himself sits in judgment over the sins of men, which are recorded in
a book by the hand of the perpetrator. Here, however, in the synagogue,
with a contrite heart and tears, the profoundly significant Unetaneh
Tokef Kedushat Hayom is read. The angels tremble and cry out: “This
is the Day of Judgment!” The great shofar is blown. And it is determined
who shall live in the coming year or die a natural death or perish by
treachery, who shall become poor or rich, exalted or humbled. But
repentance, prayer, and good deeds free one from evil fates. What is
man? “He comes from the earth and returns to the earth. He is like a
broken shard, like the stamen of a flower that withers; like grass that
dries up, like smoke that flies away without a trace, like a dream that
vanishes…..“</p>
    <p>At home, it looked gloomy; the window shutters were closed, the
rooms were not tidied, the earthenware pots filled with sand still stood
there, in which the stubs of the wax candles from last night slowly
burned, filling the air with a heavy scent.</p>
    <p>Only around noon did we children receive our tea and breakfast, which
consisted of Kapparot (cold chicken) and white bread and also served
as our midday meal. Then our playmates soon arrived, and the heavy
sorrow gradually receded from us children. With dusk, the house stirred
again. The rooms were tidied up again, the tea table was set, many
candles were lit, and a cup of wine and a braided wax candle were
prepared for Havdalah. The darker it became outside, the brighter it
became in the room. The samovar (tea machine)
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[104]" id="pgepubid00108"><a id="Seite_104" title="[104]"/></span>
was already bubbling invitingly on the table when the
synagogue-goers came home at seven o’clock. They were all exhausted
from fasting and praying, but no one ate anything; they waited patiently
until father and the others had washed and combed themselves, as it
was forbidden to do so in the morning. Then our father performed
Havdalah, meaning he prayed over the cup of wine, and only then did
everyone sit down at the table, which was richly laden with cold dishes
and cakes. Without regard for the fact that the stomach had not received
even a drop of water for 24 hours, it was now filled with sweet, sour,
bitter, and salty foods. And the stomach patiently accepted food and
drink. Every trace of exhaustion or fatigue had now disappeared, and
faces radiated inner peace and contentment. Now this difficult day was
behind them for a whole year. We children also felt the difference
between yesterday evening and this evening. I was never too cheerful or
even boisterous and loved solitude, but the oppressive atmosphere of
Erev Yom Kippur and Erev Tisha B’Av tormented me greatly.</p>
    <p>After everyone had satisfied their initial hunger, the mood became very
cheerful, and our father, leaning back in the large armchair at the head
of the table, began to recite the sublime passages from the day’s prayers,
half-singing to himself. The young men joined in, and the prayer leader
of the synagogue, a good friend of our house, usually joined us, and
everyone enjoyed the poetic chants anew. Not infrequently, they stayed
in a cheerful, elevated mood until long after midnight, and no one
thought of going to rest after the day’s exertions, even though the next
morning, at the first break of dawn, they had to return to the synagogue
to, as it is said, destroy the slanders of Satan before the Most High.
Otherwise, Satan could say to G-d, the Creator: “See, Lord, yesterday
you forgave your people their sins, and today not a single one has
appeared, your house is empty!“</p>
    <p>But Satan shall not triumph over the chosen people. And so, all the
pious gathered in the house of G-d at the first hour of morning<a id="FNanchor_P_16"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="1084587126728857420_45488-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_P_16">[P]</a>,
even if only for a short time, as only a weekday service took place. My
father immediately left the synagogue to buy an Etrog (citron-like fruit)
and a Lulav (palm branch); and he returned home in good spirits if he
succeeded in finding a completely flawless Etrog — a so-called
“Mebudar.” Such a piece cost 5-6 rubles in 1838, as at that time the
transport of the fruits from Palestine, where they grew only in small
numbers, was associated with many difficulties and dangers.
Nevertheless, each of the young men of our house received an Etrog for
himself. Each of these fragrant, magnificent fruits was carefully bedded
in soft hemp and stored in a silver vessel. These fruits are used during
the eight days of the Sukkot (Feast of Tabernacles) morning prayer. The
palm branches, myrtles, and willow branches, which belong to it
according to custom, stood in a large, water-filled earthenware jug. And
in the house, it became bright and cheerful again. People ate, drank,
laughed, and chatted to their heart’s content. I often heard it said that
during the four days from Yom Kippur to Sukkot
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[106]" id="pgepubid00110"><a id="Seite_106" title="[106]"/></span>
the sins of the Jew are not under control and are not accounted for by
G-d.</p>
    <p>Many of the jokes were about the “Sogerkes.” In the 1840s, it was still a rarity for every woman among the common people to understand how to pray in Hebrew. The need, however, to pray on Saturday and especially on the holy holidays, was great. But there were also literate women who industrialized their knowledge. For a small reward, they recited the prayers to the women in the synagogue on the aforementioned days. In the absence of such a woman, however, in the smaller Jewish towns, a man had to crawl into a barrel in the middle of the women’s section of the synagogue and, from this protective barrier — surrounded by the women — read out the prayers. As one can imagine, there were often comical scenes, and for anecdote formation, the barrel was an inexhaustible source....</p>
    <p>The female reciter was called a “sogerke” and the man a “soger.” Both had to recite the prayers in a <em class="gesperrt">whining</em> voice to encourage the surrounding women to cry. Among the listeners in our community was a butcher’s wife who was hard of hearing. She asked the reciter to speak a little louder, and in return, she would receive a large liver from her. But the reciter, with a tearful, whining voice, replied in a prayer chant: “As with the liver, so without the liver.” The surrounding, ignorant women, however, believed that these words belonged to the prayer and all cried out in a whining voice: “As with the liver, so without the liver.”</p>
    <p>After a certain section, one of these    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[107]" id="pgepubid00111"><a id="Seite_107" title="[107]"/></span>women went home and on the way met a second woman who was returning to the synagogue. This woman asked what prayer was being said there now. “Nu… the prayer of the <em class="gesperrt">liver</em>.” One said: “Last year, they didn’t say anything like that.” The other: “Perhaps today, because it’s a leap year!”…</p>
    <p>For us children, a series of beautiful prospects presented themselves in the coming days. My heart beat joyfully in anticipation of the things to come.</p>
    <p>Immediately after breakfast, the sukkah was inspected, a spacious, elongated, tall arbor with large windows that remained unused throughout the year. It therefore had to be washed, decorated, and made habitable first, and the servant immediately set to work.</p>
    <p>During the next three days until Sukkot, we had free time; we didn’t learn or study, and even daily prayer, it seemed to me, was largely neglected by the young gentlemen. We had already completely stopped attending cheder since Rosh Hashanah, as the holidays for Jewish youth lasted until the month of Cheshvan (from September to October).</p>
    <p>On Erev Yom Tov, all the carpets in the house were gathered into the sukkah, with which the young people, under the father’s guidance, hung the walls. Mirrors were brought, furniture from the dining room, and even the chandelier was not to be missed. On the eve before the first day of the festival, everyone put on festive garments. The candles of the large silver candelabra were lit by our mother and the young women, and they performed their quiet, devout prayer, after which we all comfortably sat on the chairs around the table    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[108]" id="pgepubid00112"><a id="Seite_108" title="[108]"/></span>and admired the decorated sukkah (tabernacle). Its movable roof had previously been removed and replaced with fir branches. It looked wonderfully strange. The many burning candles, the colorful carpets, the tall crystal mirrors, the green fir roof, and the nightly blue sky, which looked so kindly through the branches with its silver, sparkling stars, lent the room a fairytale splendor.</p>
    <p>The mother, festively dressed and adorned with precious jewelry, sat among her married and unmarried daughters, all richly decorated. Then the men came home from the synagogue, and there was the delightful, patriarchal family scene of the Jews of that time at the round table. In their long, black satin robes (kaftans), wide satin belts, precious, tall sable hats, and their radiant, young faces, they truly looked better than today’s youth in tailcoats and white ties with their jaded, bored expressions. The father gave us his blessing; everyone washed their hands, prayed, and took a piece of challah, which was dipped in honey. Dinner, which began with peppered fish and concluded with vegetables, was over. Many, for whom the autumnal evening air became too cool, left the sukkah; some remained sitting and chatting.</p>
    <p>The following morning, on the first day of the festival, a particularly solemn service was held in the synagogue, and it was again an imposing sight as the men, standing row upon row in their places, with the green, slender palm branch in their right hand and the fragrant, golden-yellow etrog fruit in their left, sang the hymn    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[109]" id="pgepubid00113"><a id="Seite_109" title="[109]"/></span>Hallel and then made the Hakafot circuit, led by the cantor, in the synagogue.</p>
    <p>Around one o’clock, everyone returned home, and now many guests came for the festival day, to whom wine and sweets were served. Everyone spent the afternoon as they pleased. Some slept, others went for a walk. But no one forgot that they had to be in the synagogue by five o’clock for the evening prayer. The second day differed hardly at all from the first.</p>
    <p>The following four days are the so-called Chol HaMoed days (intermediate days of the festival), on which it is permitted to travel, trade, and buy. However, the Jews of that time did not make use of this freedom, and even very poor artisans kept their workshops closed and indulged in pleasure, rest, and good food. On the fifth day, Hoshana Rabbah, the entire night is again spent reading certain sections from the Mishna. According to a folk legend, on this evening, one sees the headless shadow of the person destined to die this year. On this night, the heavens are said to part and open, and the pious, G-d-fearing Jew can see its splendor! One only has to quickly exclaim “Kol Tov!” (All good!) and every wish will then come true. — On this night, the Shamash (synagogue beadle) also prepares the Hoshanot (three small willow branches united into a small bundle), which everyone grasps during prayer and keeps in hand throughout the entire prayer time. The Hoshana prayer designated for this is performed with great devotion and tears. At the end, the leaves of the willow branches are struck off.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[110]" id="pgepubid00114">
        <a id="Seite_110" title="[110]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The white bread for this day is baked in the shape of a bird. Folk legend tells that on this day, it is finally decided in heaven who shall live or die this year, and that this bird flies to heaven and brings back the decree on a slip of paper. The seventh day of the Sukkot festival is called Shemini Atzeret. On the eve, everyone is again festively adorned. The next morning, the service in the synagogue begins very early. Heaven is implored for rain in the so-called Rain Prayer (Geshem), a thoughtful, imaginative poem. This prayer extends the service by more than an hour and has an uplifting effect on synagogue-goers.</p>
    <p>On Shemini Atzeret, one dined for the last time in the sukkah for lunch. Although the weather in the last few days was changeable, often already noticeably cold (sometimes it even snowed and one had to put on furs), people persevered and took their meals, including tea, in the sukkah until the last day. Old and young, even us children, strictly observed the religious precepts, so well did our parents understand how to uphold their wishes and will in the house. After the prayer prescribed after the last meal upon leaving the sukkah was performed, the furniture, piece by piece, was brought back into the dwelling, and the sukkah, which had recently been so magnificently decorated, stood empty and deserted again, a faithful image of all the splendors of our world. —</p>
    <p>Now came the last day of the Sukkot festival, “Simchat Torah” (Joy of the Torah). Why the joy? Among the people, it was said: “When the Jews received the Torah from Moses on Mount Sinai, they understood little of    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[111]" id="pgepubid00115"><a id="Seite_111" title="[111]"/></span>its content; but when they had fully absorbed the holy scripture, they found in it their happiness and their joy.” And truly, this Torah has become their pride, their national treasure for all time, despite the oppression, persecutions, and humiliations they had to endure.</p>
    <p>On Simchat Torah, this joy breaks down all barriers. What one otherwise rarely has the opportunity for: on this day, one sees drunk Jews in the streets. In our house, too, things were quite lively. All sorts of drinks were prepared, and the good Jewish kitchen had to provide the best dishes. Many guests were invited for lunch; the children, and even the servants, were given complete freedom, and strict discipline was lifted. My father, like all the guests, considered it a mitzvah (a religious act) to get a little tipsy at the table. My parents did not hinder the young men when they danced and sang exuberantly, even boisterously; my father even sang along cheerfully. Only the sounds of a fiddle were missing, as a Jew is not even allowed to touch a musical instrument on holidays. Many religious table songs related to this joyful day were also sung in chorus. For my father, Simchat Torah day had a special significance. As I have already mentioned, my father’s main occupation was Talmud study, which he pursued all the more diligently when he had suffered great losses in his ventures. He would then turn his back on the world, retreat to a study room, and live only “al hatorah” and “al ha’avodah,” as the Jew briefly and concisely expresses it, i.e., only in the study of the laws and in divine service, which became the main purpose of his life. Thus, from time    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[112]" id="pgepubid00116"><a id="Seite_112" title="[112]"/></span>to time, he would make a Siyum (i.e., complete a work); such an event is joyfully celebrated among the Jewish people and brings prestige and honor, especially if it is a Siyum on the entire Shas, i.e., a complete study of the entire Talmud and all commentaries. My father used to schedule his Siyum for Simchat Torah. The lively activity on this day lasted until evening, but by the evening prayer, everyone was serious again. Father performed Havdalah again, and now it was time for Zemirot, i.e., singing pious songs. The large samovar was already bubbling and steaming on the tea table, and the diligent drinkers sat together cozily late into the night. With Simchat Torah, the so-called Yamim Noraim, i.e., the serious days, come to an end, even though the next Shabbat Bereishit is already distinguished from an ordinary Shabbat, as the beginning of the Bible, the first section “Bereishit,” is now read again. The day after Simchat Torah is Isru Chag and is also considered a holiday. The table, which had been festively decorated for a full eight days, remained covered today as well, which otherwise does not happen on a weekday according to ritual custom. Lunch was taken early and consisted of cold dishes left over from the previous day, a lot of good, tasty things: cold peppered fish, cold roast turkey, etc. Only the borscht (a soup made from soured red beets) was freshly prepared.</p>
    <p>The time of festivals was over. Life slowly returned to its old routine. Rosh Chodesh brought a change.</p>
    <p>On the tenth or twelfth day of each month, when the moon shines in the evening sky, it is welcomed according to Jewish law.    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[113]" id="pgepubid00117"><a id="Seite_113" title="[113]"/></span>As a child, I loved to watch through the window when my father, accompanied by ten other Jews, stood in the bright moonlight and prayed. With cheerful words and eyes directed towards heaven, he praised the gentle moon. This usually happened on Saturday evenings.</p>
    <p>“Erev Rosh Chodesh,” i.e., the day before “Rosh Chodesh” (New Moon), was customarily observed in a special way in my parents’ house. Among the Jews of that time, there were many who fasted on this day and performed special prayers. Many beggars, old, sick, ragged, half-naked men and women with distorted faces, young people, girls, and children, came in droves on this day to collect their “Rosh Chodesh money,” as every day of repentance among Jews had to receive its consecration through alms. It was customary that, besides this day, many among the people used to fast every week on Monday and Thursday and distribute alms to the poor. On these days, one could also see the so-called “Gabbettes” in action. Gabbettes are pious souls, good, selfless women, true religious patronesses of the poor Jewish people, whose life’s task it was and still is in Lithuania today, as soon as they have taken care of everything in their own home, to go from house to house with a second Gabbette into the poor quarters to alleviate misery and need there. They walk in pairs through the alleys, begging for food from hawkers and merchants in the stalls; and they come to all private houses to ask for alms, money or food, old clothes, etc. I still vividly remember one such “Gabbette” who often came to us. She was an angel of kindness and greatness of soul. Her name was Itke, the Seamstress. She used to    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[114]" id="pgepubid00118"><a id="Seite_114" title="[114]"/></span>tell my mother about all the misery and poverty in the city. With a contrite heart and sadness in her features, she symbolically claimed that pearls and diamonds lay around in the streets, but very few bothered to pick them up. By this, she meant: One could do so many good deeds for the poor, and very few bothered to do so. Only these “jewels,” Itke the Seamstress claimed, one can take into the afterlife after death. My mother used to distribute a considerable sum of money on Rosh Chodesh. Old men and women received a coin of three Polish groschen, i.e., one and a half Russian kopecks. The younger the poor person was, the less he received, down to one groschen. Children were given only a “Pruta.” This coin was one-third of a Polish groschen, consequently one-sixth of a kopeck. This coin used to be manufactured in Brest-Litovsk by the Jewish community council with the permission of the government. I remember that this Pruta was only given to the poor, while it was not current in business life. First, it was cast in lead with the Hebrew inscription “Pruta achas,” i.e., one Pruta. But when it was misused, it was abolished, and the Pruta was made of parchment. It bore the same inscription. This Pruta was approximately one inch long and half an inch wide. This parchment money was also soon abolished; and in its place came the Pruta in the form of a medium-sized, round wooden button with a small indentation filled with red sealing wax, in which the word Pruta and the seal of the community council were impressed.</p>
    <p>The distribution of alms was actually the only    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[115]" id="pgepubid00119"><a id="Seite_115" title="[115]"/></span>form in which Erev Rosh Chodesh was observed in our family. The following day, however, Rosh Chodesh itself, we regarded as a half-holiday. In the synagogue, the prayer “Hallel” etc. was recited, and at home, there were good meals for lunch; incidentally, no manual labor was allowed to be performed throughout the day.</p>
    <p>Rosh Chodesh played an important role in the lives of Jews in general. Thus, it was customary on this date to rent apartments and hire servants and to postpone “important” household chores until this day — but especially the “setting of geese,” as it was then called. People used to cram 30-40 geese into a narrow cage so that they could barely move, gave them a lot to eat, but very little to drink. With this regimen, they became very fat. The poultry was fattened for exactly twenty-one days so that their fat would increase and their livers would grow larger in their bodies, then they were slaughtered; if one waited just one day with this procedure, the entire fattening was in vain, as was believed. On Rosh Chodesh Kislev, the geese were confined. On the twenty-first day, at daybreak, the slaughterer arrived with his assistant. He drew the large slaughtering knife from its leather sheath, made it incredibly sharp, tested the sharpness on his fingernail, and then, accompanied by the cook and the night watchman with a lantern, went into the goose pen to carry out the death sentence on the geese. Of course, before he slaughtered the first goose, he recited the prescribed prayer. After an hour, the work was done. The slaughtered geese were dragged into the kitchen, where a few poor women plucked, singed, cleaned, and salted them    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[116]" id="pgepubid00120"><a id="Seite_116" title="[116]"/></span>and left them in salt for a full hour. Then they were poured over three times with cold water, and they were kosher. The noise in the kitchen and throughout the house was great! Haste was necessary; for at Hanukkah, much schmaltz, goose liver, and especially the tasty gribenes were needed! There were tasty liver and gribenes pâtés and the wonderful dish of steamed goose giblets.</p>
    <p>According to a superstition or a mystical tradition, the slaughterer, from “Rosh Chodesh Kislev” until “Rosh Chodesh Adar,” i.e., for three months, had to eat a limb, a foot, or a head, and the like, from the poultry he slaughtered, otherwise he would have to fear being paralyzed at any moment. We always used to leave him the left foot of each goose. However, since he could not consume this abundance, a broth was prepared from the many feet, which he had to eat! —</p>
    <p>The rendering of goose fat also had great significance. It had to be done in complete silence, either before daybreak or late in the evening, so that no “evil eye” would fall upon it — otherwise, all the fat would run out of the pot! But if only a quiet person was active during the rendering, then — it was believed — the good house spirit would come in the form of a dwarf and make the fat overflow the roasting pot; and if one ladled it into another vessel, it would multiply without ceasing until all empty dishes, even the large water barrel, in the house were filled with the fat; only then would the dwarf disappear.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">From my description, today’s youth might conclude that life in an old Jewish home was unbearably    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[117]" id="pgepubid00121"><a id="Seite_117" title="[117]"/></span>difficult due to its customs and the strictness of its practices. Oh no! The Jews of that time had their great joys, enjoyed much pleasure, peace, and comfort; but all only within the circle of their families in their own homes; no roaming in ballrooms, on travels, in baths, over mountains, and seas. He lived quietly, well, and long. He gave to his G-d what was due to Him and took from life what pleased him. There was consecration and deep symbolism in the forms of life, which cannot exactly be said of the ceremonies and customs of present-day society. Certainly, they too have the meaning of uniting people and creating a higher form of community for individuals. But who can deny that this bond appears pitiful compared to that firm, social connection prescribed by Jewish law and achieved by former Jewish life? One was a guarantor for the other, i.e., a surety, and the formulas “Kol Yisrael Chaverim” (All Israel are brothers) and “Achenu Bnei Yisrael” (Our brothers, children of Israel) had content! It was only consistent that a Jew back then did not doff his hat to another. For the same reason, Jewish “freethinkers,” if they publicly violated a religious commandment, were pursued by the people with reproaches. If, for example, such a freethinker showed himself on the street on a Saturday evening, when one is only allowed to walk a certain short distance and not carry a stick, umbrella, or handkerchief without an Eruv, he was met with hostile glances because he violated the fundamental idea of Mosaic law — that of communal guarantee and the individual’s responsibility towards the community as a whole. The sin of the individual must indeed be atoned for by the entire people.</p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p class="break"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[118]" id="pgepubid00122">
        <a id="Seite_118" title="[118]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00123">The Beginning of the Enlightenment Period.</h2>
    <h3 id="pgepubid00124">I.<br/>
<br/>

Lilienthal.</h3>
    <p>From the advanced age that a benevolent fate has allowed me to reach, I want to cast a retrospective glance at the culturally significant epoch for the Jews of Lithuania towards the end of the 1830s. I consider it fortunate to have experienced that period in which the generous reforms under the government of Emperor Nicholas I brought about the spiritual, and even physical, regeneration of the Jews in Lithuania.</p>
    <p>Whoever, like me, has lived through the period from 1838 to today, has participated in all the religious struggles in the family life of Lithuanian Jews, and has finally observed the great progress, may and must express their admiration for the idea of those reform laws and bless them. Yes, one may even speak of it with enthusiasm when comparing the <em class="gesperrt">mostly</em> uncultivated, wretched Jews of the 1840s with the Lithuanian Jews of the 1860s and 1870s, among whom today there are so many perfectly European-educated men who achieve outstanding things in the most diverse fields of literature, science, and art, and who do not lack external honors and titles.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[119]" id="pgepubid00125">
        <a id="Seite_119" title="[119]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The masses often instinctively sense the impending arrival of a great event. Throughout the entire Lithuanian territory, the rumor suddenly spread that a thorough transformation was imminent for the chedarim (Jewish elementary schools); from the melamdim (elementary school teachers), who had previously taught in Jewish jargon, knowledge of Russian would henceforth be required so that they could translate the Bible into that language for the schoolchildren.</p>
    <p>This rumor caused great concern among the older men. They thought with dread that Hebrew, the word of G-d, would probably gradually be neglected. The younger ones, however, including my two older brothers-in-law, received the new tidings with eager anticipation. But they only dared to speak in whispers about the coming reorganization.</p>
    <p>The melamdim were simply desperate…</p>
    <p>One day, my father, returning from evening prayer, brought the very interesting news from the synagogue that the rumor which had recently surfaced was proving true: a Doctor of Philology named Lilienthal had been commissioned by the Ministry of Public Education (headed by the educated and humane Minister Uvarov) to travel throughout Russia to examine the educational level of Jews across the country, to gather information about the Melamdim, in whose hands the instruction of Jewish youth lay; a magnificent reform plan had been drafted in Petersburg, and the rabbinical schools in Vilna and Zhitomir were also to be started within a certain period. My father, who was strictly religious, was not too saddened by an impending reform, however, for he himself always complained about the poor
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[120]" id="pgepubid00126"><a id="Seite_120" title="[120]"/></span>
teaching methods in the Jewish schools of Brest and wished for various improvements in this area.</p>
    <p>Indeed, the inspector of the Riga public schools, Dr. phil. Lilienthal, had been entrusted with the task of spreading Western European education among the Jews, because he was a European-educated Jew and at the same time familiar with the Hebrew language and possessed some Talmudic knowledge.</p>
    <p>Lilienthal had begun his work by first contacting the most respected Jewish scholars who had been in close touch with the people throughout their lives. Thus, he turned to the famous Rabbi Reb Mendele Libawitzer, the head of the Hasidim sect, which numbered more than 100,000 followers in Lithuania and Little Russia. He hoped to win over this authority for his cultural reforms. Equally urgently, he sought out Reb Chaim Woloshiner, the head of the local Yeshiva. The minister summoned both men to Petersburg for consultation.</p>
    <p>Lilienthal did not achieve success with this, for the large number of followers of the Libawitzer Rabbi, out of fear, did not allow their revered Rabbi to heed this call, as they had learned that it concerned major reforms in Talmudic and biblical instruction. The Libawitzer began to zealously oppose the reforms by all means, unconcerned about the consequences (cf. Journal Voskhod 1903).</p>
    <p>In Petersburg, people were indignant, but Reb Mendele was only punished with a brief house arrest. Reb Chaim Woloshiner also refused to comply with the minister’s summons. He excused himself with his advanced age: the journey to Petersburg was too arduous for him. He recommended
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[121]" id="pgepubid00127"><a id="Seite_121" title="[121]"/></span>
Reb David Bichewere in his place. However, this proposal was not accepted; and so Dr. Lilienthal embarked on the journey to the Jewish Pale of Settlement. —</p>
    <p>Some days had passed since then, when my father brought the news that Dr. Lilienthal had already arrived in Brest, our then place of residence, and that he, along with the young men, my brothers-in-law, intended to pay the doctor a visit.</p>
    <p>My mother expressed no small astonishment at this intention; my father explained to her briefly and concisely: If he himself did not lead the young men to Dr. Lilienthal, they would find their own way. I believe, however, that this was merely an excuse: my father himself was very eager to make Dr. Lilienthal’s acquaintance, so as to learn as quickly as possible more details about the impending upheaval in the school system. My mother’s spiritual eye, however, saw deeper and sharper into this whole matter than my father’s, which was also confirmed later.</p>
    <p>It is impossible to describe the jubilation of the young men that they would soon visit the interesting Dr. Lilienthal. My elder brother-in-law was particularly happy; besides outstanding talent and unusual Talmudic knowledge, he possessed tireless diligence. By the age of fourteen, he had almost the entire knowledge of a rabbi. — — —</p>
    <p>The visit to Dr. Lilienthal was over. My father learned much, very much: Firstly: No Hasid may be a Melamed; secondly: Every Melamed is obliged to master the Russian language in speech and writing and to be able to read German; furthermore, the Melamed is obliged to know the Bible and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[122]" id="pgepubid00128"><a id="Seite_122" title="[122]"/></span>
all Prophets without exception precisely, and finally, the Melamed may not teach the following sections to students who are already receiving Talmudic instruction: Baba Metzia (Field Damages), Baba Kamma (Law of Exchange), Baba Batra (Building Laws).</p>
    <p>Dr. Lilienthal stayed in Brest for some time and, according to his mission, also visited many Chedarim. He was horrified and dejected by the wild appearance of the Melamdim, but surprised and delighted by the Semitic racial purity of the pupils, especially their black, intelligent eyes. He also witnessed a scene that deeply moved him, for he became convinced of the great importance of children’s education for every Jew, even the poorest. One day, Dr. Lilienthal visited a city Cheder and noticed that both the Melamed and the students were excitedly awaiting an indefinite something. Soon after, a shabbily dressed Jew entered the Cheder, carrying his son, about six years old, completely wrapped in a large Talles<a id="FNanchor_Q_17"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="1084587126728857420_45488-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_Q_17">[Q]</a>, in his arms. The mother followed close behind the father. Both wept with joy and sincere gratitude to G-d for having allowed them to experience this beautiful, significant moment, to bring their son to the Cheder for the first time. The crowd of students rushed in from outside to gawk at the event. The Melamed called out the strangers
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[123]" id="pgepubid00129"><a id="Seite_123" title="[123]"/></span>
a loud Scholem aleichem (Peace be with you!), stood up from his seat, and took the hero of this scene, his new student, into his arms. Now the little one was placed on the table, and he almost cried from surprise and excitement. Thereupon he was seated on the nearest bench, and there he received, above all, cake, nuts, raisins, and sweets, of which the happy mother had brought an apron full. All spectators congratulated the blessed parents on their son’s first day of school. The Melamed sat down next to the little one, took the printed Alef-Beis (alphabet) glued onto a cardboard tablet, placed it before the little one, then took the large pointer in hand, and now he blessed the beginning of the lesson with the wish: May the boy be raised to Thora-Lernen (i.e., scholarship), to Chupe (marriage), and to Maassim-towim (good deeds). “Amen,” said the parents and all bystanders. Thereupon, the Melamed showed the aspiring student the “Alef” (“A”) for the first time, and after the boy had repeated it several times like a parrot, also the “Beis” (“B”) and then also the “Gimel” (“G”). The radiant mother had forgotten everyone present. She felt transported to heaven. With full hands, she distributed the brought delicacies, while a Malach (angel) threw the best and tastiest from above, right before the nose of the future scholar, for each letter. In such a way, the boy began to fulfill his school duties in his sixth year of life.....</p>
    <p>During his stay in Brest, Dr. Lilienthal gathered many young people around him daily, to whom he spoke of the necessity of acquiring Western European education.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[124]" id="pgepubid00130"><a id="Seite_124" title="[124]"/></span>
He gave them useful advice, depicted their own future as men of education in beautiful images, and thereby won the hearts of the receptive youth, who, while remaining faithful to the customs of their parents in religious matters, otherwise embarked on new paths and increasingly distanced themselves from the cultural views of the older generation — the characteristic feature of the Lilienthal era!</p>
    <p>From Brest, Dr. Lilienthal then traveled to Vilna to fulfill his mission there as well. A deputation from the provincial city of Minsk greeted him and invited him to their city. Dr. Lilienthal accepted the invitation and went to Minsk, where he was received with the greatest honors by the most respected Jews. Immediately after his arrival, an Assiphe (general assembly) was convened, where he was to answer important questions. Messrs. S. Rapaport and O. Lurie spoke at the meeting. The most important question was: What does the Minister of Public Education actually intend with the reform? Were all the Jews of Russia ultimately to be prepared merely for baptism? Then all Jews would rise up as one man against these reforms and bring them to failure. For if one took away a Jew’s religion, the solid ground beneath his feet would waver, and he would be lost. His own children would rebel against him. Dr. Lilienthal was horrified. He swore by a Sepher-Thora (holy scroll) that he wished to preserve the Jewish people’s ethnicity and religion and abhorred baptism. Weeping with agitation, he repeatedly assured them that he sought only the best for the Jews. Finally, he succeeded in calming the assembled people.</p>
    <p>He also came to the city of Woloschin, where the Jeschiba
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[125]" id="pgepubid00131"><a id="Seite_125" title="[125]"/></span>
(Talmudic Academy) was then in its prime, in fulfillment of the ministerial commission.</p>
    <p>A Yeshiva is an educational institution for adult young men who have soon reached the highest level in Talmudic knowledge and are ready for a rabbinical position. There were three such Talmudic academies at that time: in Woloschin, in Mir, and in Minsk. Funds are still being collected for these institutions by the entire Jewish community. In each of these institutions, more than 200 young men received their instruction. A particularly large building with several large, spacious rooms! A “Head,” a kind of director, a great Talmudist, a religious, wise, very honest man, leads this institution, while many Melamdim — experienced Talmudists — provide instruction to the young men. The student body consists of all classes of the Jewish people, mostly from the middle class, whose intellectual legacy constitutes their liquid capital. These mostly live at the expense of the institution. Young men from wealthy circles are also numerous here, mostly already married men who, fathers of several children, live here at their own expense. My father himself already had three children while he “studied” at the Woloschiner Jeschiba for the entire year. He only came home for the holidays.</p>
    <p>In Woloschin, Lilienthal had to repeatedly swear, in order to appease the spirits, that he was far removed from all endeavors to lead Jews closer to baptism. — — — — — — — — — — — — —</p>
    <p>In all quietness, the cultural movement began among the Jews of Russia. The youth stirred energetically; intellectual work commenced. It took little time and relatively little effort to implement the indicated reforms.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[126]" id="pgepubid00132"><a id="Seite_126" title="[126]"/></span>
A refreshing air blew through the Jewish society of the city of Brest, as well as all other Russian-Jewish localities.</p>
    <p>I have already told how great my brothers-in-law’s jubilation was over the impending reforms. But they had to restrain themselves so as not to give themselves away and not to hurt my mother, who had her prophetic judgment about this change. Meanwhile, my brothers-in-law were not the only ones in Brest who were enthusiastic about Western European culture. There was also a group of more than 20 young men who took Lilienthal’s movement very seriously and worked diligently for the cause in their circle — if they encountered a limited person, they were of the opinion that it would ultimately be enough if this person could at least write an address in Russian.</p>
    <p>One must not forget that the knowledge of my brothers-in-law and their contemporaries in European languages of that time was very limited and consisted of reading, writing, a little Russian and Polish. The German language was more familiar to them. They had an inkling of the classical literature of these languages and some sciences. The lower Jewish class, however, understood neither how to write, nor to read, nor to speak a European language; they spoke a meager Polish, and a hodgepodge of German and Russian was necessarily used by the Jewish merchants; while the common people spoke a mixture of Polish, Russian, and Latvian, which they used in the markets with the villagers.</p>
    <p>The upheavals could only become profound through the establishment of rabbinical schools guided by a new spirit. Thus, the schools in Wilna and Schitomir came into being. The first
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[127]" id="pgepubid00133"><a id="Seite_127" title="[127]"/></span>
students were mostly young people who had made every effort to be admitted when the schools opened. Only rarely was their entry into these schools possible without family struggles. Those for whom it was not easy broke away from wife and child and fled to Germany, where they often, with great hardship, studied medicine, pharmacy, philology, or other subjects with brilliant results. The city of Rossieni in Courland can name more than 10 such knights of the spirit, doctors, lawyers, pharmacists, philosophers, and poets, who had studied partly in Russia, partly abroad. Even now, a professor of Oriental languages lives and works in Russia, who spent his youth with Talmudic tomes and later educated himself in this way. Of course, he and his children are baptized. Even the Jewish astronomer Ch. S. Slonimsky was not hindered by his significant Talmudic knowledge — perhaps it even contributed to his becoming famous in mathematics. — The majority of the pupils in the new rabbinical schools were formerly Talmudists. They learned easily, and most received the gold medal upon leaving school, as did those who later attended university! The study of the Talmud is indeed a good intellectual exercise in every respect, to which were added the thirst for knowledge, the spirited character, and the intellectual élan of the Jew of that time. — — — — — — — — — — — — —</p>
    <p>One day after the visit to Dr. Lilienthal, we find the young men, my brothers-in-law, sitting thoughtfully together in their study. “The books will surely be found,” said my inquisitive, elder brother-in-law. “We just have to be careful to spare time from Talmud study
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[128]" id="pgepubid00134"><a id="Seite_128" title="[128]"/></span>
for our new studies, without attracting the attention of our parents ...“, to which the other replied in his phlegmatic manner: “Yes, certainly! If you start studying, I’ll join in too.” Dr. Lilienthal had primarily recommended the study of the Russian language to them; then, as equally important, natural history, as well as German literature.</p>
    <p>Some time later, there were several disturbing incidents that were not without their comical side. My mother had been firmly convinced since the young men’s visit to Dr. Lilienthal that a new, foreign element had entered her house, as well as those of other Jews in Russia, whereby the word of G-d was truly to be relegated to the background. And she became very sad. Inconspicuously, but sharply, she observed the behavior and actions of the young men. The brothers-in-law had acquired the necessary textbooks and begun to study, which naturally had to happen at the expense of Talmud study. Outwardly, they remained calm and seemed, as usual, to be occupied with the Talmud. Yet, an attentive observer could often discover a volume of Schiller’s or Zschokke’s works among the large Talmudic tomes; in the latter, Engelbert’s idyllic way of life particularly filled the Jewish youth with enthusiasm, while the Princess of Wolfenbüttel — especially among Jewish women — aroused sympathy and pity. And Schiller’s Marquis Posa was considered a role model by all younger men. The sober Russian grammar was also at hand, and a natural history was not missing from the book collection either.</p>
    <p>Since the visit to Dr. Lilienthal, my father let no opportunity pass to speak of him and his
   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[129]" id="pgepubid00135"><a id="Seite_129" title="[129]"/></span>
important and great task. It truly pleased him to discuss the magnificent reforms with every guest, and especially with the young men, my brothers-in-law. He became zealous in such conversations, praising that order should finally be established in the field of Jewish youth education, but still resented that Dr. Lilienthal had spoken so impiously, saying that the previously mentioned Talmudic sections must be withheld from Jewish youth, and that one should not, if necessary, abide by Talmudic laws.</p>
    <p>... It was one morning in the memorable summer of 1842, when my brothers-in-law, without suspecting that anyone could hear them, took the new books from their hiding place, laid them on the open Talmudic tomes, and, together with the third, Reb Herschel, a Melamed from the Kehila Orlo, who was brilliant and possessed great Talmudic knowledge, loudly disputed a sentence in “Don Carlos.” To prevent any possible surprise, they read and spoke in exactly the same singing manner in which they usually studied the Talmud. My mother seemed haunted by a ghost since Dr. Lilienthal’s appearance, and now she wanted to go into the young men’s study in the hope of convincing herself that her tormenting thoughts were, after all, unfounded, and that the devil in the form of Dr. Lilienthal had not yet completely taken possession of her sons-in-law. She remained standing at the bottom of the stairs leading to the study, listening. Then she ascended the stairs, stopped again, listened, and heard with joy how diligently they were studying inside. But as she brought her ear closer to the closed door and listened more attentively,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[130]" id="pgepubid00136"><a id="Seite_130" title="[130]"/></span>
fright and astonishment seized her. A terrible expression of disappointment and anger distorted her features. Of “Omar abaye,” with which words many treatises of the Talmud begin, she heard nothing. Only Marquis Posa, Duke Alba, etc.</p>
    <p>“So are they really just those sinful little books that the young men are occupying themselves with?” she thought with great sorrow in her heart.</p>
    <p>A considerable time passed before my mother could compose herself. Then, with a trembling hand, she grasped the doorknob, opened the door, and stood speechless with anger on the threshold. At the sound of the opening door, the three surprised men turned their heads, and they surely would have cried out if their breath had not failed them. Their first movement was to slide all the books under the table; they did not want to defy their mother. It even pained them that these “little books” caused her so much grief. Yet, the allure of the new, the attraction in studying foreign languages and sciences after the monotony of Talmud study, was an irresistible compulsion. My mother first regained control of herself and cried out loudly: “Oh heaven, am I to see the word of G-d so scorned in my own house! In the same Nigen (melody) in which you learn the Talmud, you now scorn it by reading these apikorssischen (heretical) little books!! And you too, Reb Herschel, do you also need this?! What do you intend to do with this in your Kehile Orlo! Do you also want to become an Apikaures (heretic), like my young men?” She was so agitated during this speech that her feet almost failed her. The young men remained
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[131]" id="pgepubid00137"><a id="Seite_131" title="[131]"/></span>
silent; their heads, turned to the left towards the window, were motionless. Since no answer, and consequently no contradiction, came, the mother calmed down somewhat, and she left in silence.</p>
    <p>Not long after, she surprised my elder brother-in-law alone at his new studies. It was early morning of the same summer. The mountain near our house was still shrouded in gloomy fog. I happened to be in the courtyard and saw my mother come out of the house. She went out through the large gate. I followed her. She took a few steps along the fence of the flower garden that was next to the house and stopped, astonished. “Who is standing there?” she said as if to herself — or was it addressed to me? She took a few more steps and said in a loud voice: “Yes, yes, I believe it’s David (my elder brother-in-law)! What is he doing there?” she exclaimed and quickly approached the corner of the garden where a large old poplar tree stood. She had not been mistaken: it was David. My brother-in-law was wearing only a light Chalat (dressing gown), its belt ends loosely thrown over each other instead of tied in a bow; his chest was bare, his hair disheveled, one Peje (sidelock) was completely behind his ear, while the other moved on his cheek like a small snake; the black velvet skullcap showed ample traces of down pillows, his bare feet were in slippers. The morning fog lay upon his figure, trembling with cold and dampness. His right hand worked vigorously, removing the bark of the poplar and extracting small insects, which my brother-in-law, not without disgust, threw into a small box with a glass lid. The
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[132]" id="pgepubid00138"><a id="Seite_132" title="[132]"/></span>
sight must have been quite comical, for my mother cried out, half surprised, half amused: “Wos tust du do?” (What are you doing there?)</p>
    <p>“Gur nischt” (Nothing at all), he replied laconically, without letting himself be disturbed in his work.</p>
    <p>“Wos is do im Kästchen auf der Erd?” (What’s in the little box on the ground?) the mother continued to ask.</p>
    <p>“Gur nischt!” (Nothing at all!) said the surprised naturalist.</p>
    <p>“Warum biste so früh do?” (Why are you here so early?) my mother inquired.</p>
    <p>“Early! It’s not early at all!” answered the young
man, hoping to get out of the situation that way. But
it was no use, for his mother leaned over the railing
and, not without annoyance, discovered a book next to the
box. Now she understood that both served one and the same
purpose, and she silently cursed Dr. Lilienthal. A desperate, telling sigh escaped the deeply saddened
heart of my poor mother. She remained rigid for a while,
looking at the things before her. Then she turned to the
right and entered the garden. The half-naked naturalist
guessed her intentions and quickly fled, leaving everything
behind as spoils. In his escape, he lost one shoe; he
held his other necessary articles of clothing tightly with both hands.
My mother quickly approached the poplar, looked into the
box, and to her indescribable astonishment,
discovered inside a common fly, a May beetle, a ladybug
(“G-d’s little cow”), an ant, a woodworm,
and many other insects impaled on pins. She
couldn’t believe her eyes, and her shrug indicated more
than spoken words could have, pointing to the question:
“Why does a person need such vermin?” But she was
formally shocked when she took the book in her hands and therein
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[133]" id="pgepubid00139"><a id="Seite_133" title="[133]"/></span>
next to the explanations, also saw illustrations of some
insects. Chance would have it that her gaze fixed on a
“domestic insect” that lay comfortably stretched
out—she shuddered with disgust.—That the young people
wanted to learn German and Russian finally made sense to her.
She eventually understood the pleasure of reading; she herself
was very well-read in Hebrew literature; however, that
someone, and especially her sons-in-law, would be interested in
how an ant moves, or how many legs a May beetle has,
or what kind of eyes a green worm has, that she could not
understand! She seized the trophies of the early morning
encounter and returned to the house by the same path
the fleeing hero had taken a few minutes earlier, and on which
he had left one shoe as a sign of his defeat. She also took
the shoe, brought everything into the dining room, and placed
it all on the windowsill. In the meantime, my father had
gotten up; when he heard about the matter, he laughed heartily.—</p>
    <p>Such scenes did not only take place in our house:
all the other companions of my brothers-in-law had similar
or even greater difficulties and inconveniences to endure.—For my brother-in-law David, such persecutions had become
too much. When he was once called for lunch, he reported
himself sick, and that same evening, without saying anything
to anyone, not even his wife, he traveled to his father,
who was a rabbi, in Semiatycze, a small town in Poland.
He stayed there for some time; at first, my sisters
and my parents were happy about this, for they now knew
him to be far from the steadily growing Lilienthal movement.
Later, it was a great effort to persuade him to return to Brest.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[134]" id="pgepubid00140">
        <a id="Seite_134" title="[134]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>My brothers-in-law now sought means to prevent such scenes
as I have described above, and they chose a quiet spot,
located between the hills, far enough from our house.
There, like-minded companions gathered to debate various
books and to pass resolutions on the burning question of
educational endeavors. Despite all diligent efforts and an
unusual thirst for knowledge among these young people, not a
single outstanding personality emerged from Brest in the first
period, although we must do justice to the great merits of
my brothers-in-law and their contemporaries and recognize
them as pioneers who paved many paths: This significantly
facilitated the opportunity for the coming generation to study
and eliminated many prejudices.</p>
    <p>The three young men mentioned were probably the first in
Brest to stretch out their youthful, strong hands for the apple
of knowledge that Lilienthal offered them and eagerly grasp it.
My older brother-in-law, despite his great diligence and all his
abilities, tried in vain to find the spot where he should bite
into the apple—all European attempts failed due to his Asian
upbringing. With his Talmudic knowledge, he could have
achieved much greater things for himself and society. My
younger brother-in-law was able to enjoy the apple and quickly
became a man educated by the standards of the time, while
Reb Herschel, the Melamed, stretched out his plebeian hands
for the aforementioned apple of knowledge, seized it, and took
a deep bite…. It wasn’t long before he transformed from an
“Orler man” into an interesting, educated Mr. Hermann
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[135]" id="pgepubid00141"><a id="Seite_135" title="[135]"/></span>
Blumberg. In a word: the Jewish youth of Brest
partook of the apple of knowledge more or less;
but everyone tasted it, and the seed that
Dr. Lilienthal sowed in Brest bore considerable fruit,
depending on the nature of the soil. The first
educational pioneers in Brest only dominated the first decade
of that era and were condemned to cultural unfruitfulness,
as they unfortunately, as I recall, had chosen
Epicurus and his ethics as their model among the sages of
ancient Greece….</p>
    <p>However, if Dr. Lilienthal had such rich successes,
it was only because the intellectual soil in Russia was very well
prepared: The Jewish child of male sex (but not the girls)
was then encouraged to learn from earliest youth and later,
already in boyhood, was introduced to scholastic intricacies,
many Talmudic subtleties, and a serious outlook on life. Since
no other studies distracted him, the young student could devote
himself entirely to the study of the Talmud daily. Entertainment
he found only at home within the family circle (hence the
attachment), as well as in the modest family life of his comrades.
The countless amusements of today were unknown to the youth
of that time. And so, at that time, the Jew, even in his youth,
was intellectually a complete, albeit one-sided, person. He clung
with body and soul to his tradition and his religion, which
encompassed for him morality, ethics—the entire world.
His Bible offered him sufficient knowledge of world history,
reaching back to ancient times and down to the Christian era;
his prophets ennobled his spirit, delighted his soul,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[136]" id="pgepubid00142"><a id="Seite_136" title="[136]"/></span>
gave it impetus, filled it with enthusiasm, and the pride
of the child and thus also of the Jewish man, self-awareness,
took root already in his youth—what those of other faiths
tend to call arrogance and impudence. The ethics of the Jewish
sages, their robust and at the same time sublime outlook on life,
made the Jew of that time an early thinker and philosopher,
who also found beauty in his religion. The Jewish people then
lived as if on an island, far from the rest of the world, but not
<em class="gesperrt">wild</em> like islanders. They were happy here on the island,
where they possessed the world of the spiritual for themselves
alone: their faith, their tradition, which granted them all
enjoyment in temporal life. And the hope for a future life
allowed them to endure the sufferings of the present. From this
spiritual realm, no human power could drive them. Here they
were lord and master.</p>
    <p>The Sturm und Drang period of the Jewish youth of that
time took place at the school desk. No revolution, no love
affairs tore him away from his contemplative path; nor did
business, for it was considered a sacred duty by parents to
provide for their son far beyond his youth, even after he was
already a husband and father, as it was the greatest happiness
if the young husband studied the Talmud without interruption.
From this perspective, wealthy people chose for their daughters
and sons: the bride had to be, above all, beautiful in form,
intelligent, and well-behaved. But primarily a “Bas tov”,
i.e., the daughter of a learned and religious man. I can attest
that the parents’ choice, which was not swayed by the god
Mammon, was rarely a mistake. By and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[137]" id="pgepubid00143"><a id="Seite_137" title="[137]"/></span>
large, as far as I can recall, there were many very happy
marriages at that time, in which the morality of the young
couple consecrated the union and secured fidelity forever. No
disappointments, no oversaturation, no haste for change
disturbed the harmony of the couple, and the true divine spark
of love nourished the sacred flame on the domestic hearth,
<em class="gesperrt">the flame</em> that no storm in life could extinguish. And in
the gloomy days of autumn or even in the cold, short, lonely
winter days—in old age, when the fire has long since burned
out, this spark still glowing under the ashes warms and sustains
the often-chilled soul.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">If the Enlightenment shook this sacred marital life and
broke many precious goods, one should not forget that the too
strong light of European education broke in too quickly without
the gentle mediation of twilight and dazzled the bewildered
youth. Indeed, the first adherents of education were already
mature men who, until that moment, had led an almost ascetic
life.—</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[138]" id="pgepubid00144">
        <a id="Seite_138" title="[138]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <h3 id="pgepubid00145">II.<br/>

Yeshiva Bochurim.<a id="FNanchor_R_18"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="1084587126728857420_45488-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_R_18">[R]</a><br/>
</h3>
    <p>Towards the end of the 1830s, the Yeshiva Bochurim formed
the learning proletariat in Brest, as throughout Lithuania.
Their religious and spiritual education was systematically
regulated. Jewish society took care of this at great expense.
In contrast, their physical care remained entirely problematic,
which is why a sickly, stunted appearance was characteristic
of the Yeshiva Bocher. In their daily food, clothing, and
shelter, they were entirely dependent on fortunate chance and
the grace of their fellow citizens. At best, they were given
lunch, but not every day of the week. For the other meals,
the one “who provides food for the sparrows in the air”
took care of them. They found shelter in the Bothemidroshim,
which were both study houses and synagogues. On the hard
wooden benches, with their fists under their heads, they slept
the sleep of the righteous in summer and near the heated oven
in winter. They received their clothing from charitable citizens
always at the wrong time: padded winter clothes at the beginning
of summer, and summer clothes and boots in late autumn.
Thus, they froze in winter and sweated twice as much as the
rich in summer. In this way, they eked out their existence
year in, year out, diligently and persistently studying their
Talmud until their 20th year. Then they married, sometimes
very advantageously, for they were honored and sought after by
wealthy citizens, as they were regarded by the people as good
Talmudists and honorable, pious individuals.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[139]" id="pgepubid00146">
        <a id="Seite_139" title="[139]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>These bochurim were usually divided into three classes
according to their rabbinical knowledge. In my parents’ house,
a different member of these three classes received lunch every
day. The eldest of them was named Schamele; as a capable
Talmudist, he already belonged to the Yeshiva Bochurim, the
highest, third class. He was a quiet, clever, but clumsy, blond
boy with good-natured, blue eyes. He wore the same long-tailed
caftan, torn at the elbows, in summer and winter. The second
bocher belonged to the Orem-Bocherim, as he received instruction
in the Bible and the lighter parts of the Talmud from the urban
Melamdim, and partly from the legally knowledgeable, young
and old Talmudists in the Bothemidroshim. He was named Fischele
and formed the living opposite of Schamele, for he was agile,
black-eyed, and always seemed agitated, thus justifying the
nickname Fischele. The third was named Motele; he belonged
to the youngest, lowest class and was a Wanderbocher. He was
by nature a quiet, thoughtful, calmly reasoning youth, the true
type of the Wanderbocher.</p>
    <p>Most of these young men came from the surrounding towns
and villages to Brest to study there. They possessed much
common sense, were quiet, and performed every service in the
houses where they received their lunch. They were excellently
suited, during the intellectual ferment of the Lilienthal movement,
to bring correspondence and enlightened (apikorsic) books
to the young people in the city.</p>
    <p>One could often see one or another of them at dusk, stealthily
creeping into our courtyard like a cat, with a packet of this
intellectual “contraband,” and disappearing directly up the
stairs leading to my brothers-in-law’s study in the evening
darkness. Had my mother’s watchful eye spotted them, things
would have gone badly for them; on <em class="gesperrt">that</em> day, they certainly
would not have eaten their fill at our house.</p>
    <p>Fischele had gradually trained himself as an autodidact to become a very
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[140]" id="pgepubid00147"><a id="Seite_140" title="[140]"/></span>
good educator. He used to ask, half-jokingly, half-seriously,
for help: to become an Oremmann (poor man) from an Orembocher.
Soon he married a good girl and, as an educated man, found a
good reception in higher Jewish society. In contrast, Schamele,
as we later learned, did not end his life with large Talmudic
tomes.</p>
    <p>The Lilienthal movement had left deep traces even in the
orthodox circles of the lower Jewish populace, guiding the youth
onto new paths. Already after a decade, most children of the
lower classes, as well as artisans, were seen in school, and
European education became common property of the Jewish
population. This shared education brought about a fusion, an
equalization of patricians and common people. The specialist,
the doctor, the lawyer, etc., took the place of the traditional
Miyuches (aristocracy).</p>
    <p>Meanwhile, the traditional study of the Talmud did not cease;
it was merely valued in a completely different way; and by the
end of the 1860s, I found the three bochurim described earlier
in the same country, with a completely different appearance.
Their external appearance left little to be desired by the end of
the 1860s. Each of these bochurim could already read and write
Russian and had a concept of world history. But he remained
true to his old religion and had full faith in G-d that a better
time would come for his people. From the midst of this learning
proletariat emerged the rabbis for the small Lithuanian towns,
as well as the Dayanim (folk judges) and the More Horah (legal
experts) who had to decide on treif and kosher and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[141]" id="pgepubid00148"><a id="Seite_141" title="[141]"/></span>
ritual-hygienic questions, furthermore the Magidim (folk
preachers), the Shochtim (cattle and poultry slaughterers),
the Chazonim (cantors), and finally the Batlanim, poor
Talmudists of all ages, whom one would have recite Psalms,
hymns, or Mishnayot from the Talmud during joyful or sad
events, or read day and night by a deceased person.</p>
    <p>An Orembocher usually became a Melamed, but before that,
he had to serve for a few years as a tutor, a head assistant,
in a Cheder (school for small children).</p>
    <p>From all these functionaries, a small fraction separated
themselves, calling themselves Prushim (separated ones), young
and old men whose sole purpose in life was to devote themselves
undisturbed, body and soul, to Talmudic studies. Separated from
wife and child—far from their homeland and the world—they
spent their entire lives exploring all the subtleties of this
doctrine, all the intricacies of scholasticism, and discussing
various interpretations with others. These ascetics lived in the
remote village of Eishishok in the Vilna Governorate, solely on
the charity of the citizens, primarily on the kindness of the good
women who sent them food and drink to the study houses, which
they regarded as a sacred duty and a G-d-pleasing work. Such a
woman barely possessed 50 rubles in assets, with which she
conducted trade and supported her children and her husband, who
likewise dedicated himself day and night to Talmudic study as
the sole purpose of his life. The powerful phrase Talmud-Torah,
i.e., to promote the study of the Talmud, “to learn,” stood
then among the entire Jewish people, as unfortunately today only
among a very, very small part, on the same level as their own
economic concerns.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[142]" id="pgepubid00149">
        <a id="Seite_142" title="[142]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The type of Wanderbocher, of course, offered the strongest
interest. He had the blood of Famulus Wagner: he always
thirsted to learn new things. Such a Wanderbocher, scantily
clothed, used to walk on foot from one Kartzma (inn) to another
on the main road, in those good old days of the 1840s and 1850s,
before there were railways in Russia. Sometimes he managed to
“hop up” onto a “Baued” (a one- or two-horse drawn cart
covered by a canvas stretched over hoops), where the Jewish
carter willingly made room for him on the driver’s seat. Inside
the Baued itself, under the canvas cover, there was a very cozy
audience of all ages, statuses, and tribes. The cart moved slowly
forward, as the hungry, overtired horses could only pull weakly.
The passengers therefore had time to chat comfortably, and the
half-frozen Wanderbocher listened to these true and fictional
tales with rapt attention and absorbed everything. How much
romance such a journey contained for a young, receptive mind!
It made one pensive and reflective.</p>
    <p>From such a Wanderbocher, a Maggid usually developed. In his
childhood, he had learned in his local Talmud-Torah, a Jewish
elementary school, as maintained by every larger community.
Poor children and mainly orphans were admitted there as early
as eight years old to receive instruction in the Hebrew language,
prayer, and the Holy Scriptures. From this school sprang the
three types of bochurim described above. In his youth, many a one began
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[143]" id="pgepubid00150"><a id="Seite_143" title="[143]"/></span>
the wandering life. After having received instruction in Talmudic
studies as an Orembocher, he moved to the next Yeshiva, where
his further education, lodging, and clothing were provided free
of charge. For Jews from all regions also donated much money
for these institutions. He stayed there as long as he wished.
However, no one prevented him from seeking out a second
educational institution if he felt compelled to hear other
teachers, to learn other statutes and commentaries, for Talmudic
science is as unfathomable as the seabed, the Jew of that time
believed. In the new place, he got to know other people,
customs, and traditions. The way there was neither very far nor
very arduous; during the summer, he could walk scantily clothed
and barefoot, unless a stroke of luck in the form of a carter
sometimes came to his aid and brought him to an inn. There he
rested for some time with the Jewish Arendar (tenant farmer)
in the village, heard adventurous stories, both true and fictional,
from the various visitors to the tavern, and then departed, richer
in experience.</p>
    <p>These three types of bochurim can rightly be regarded as the
knights of the spirit. Their entire lives they had to contend with
hardship and hunger, and—they did not succumb.</p>
    <p>The deep knowledge of folk life, its hardships and joys, its
customs and habits, and above all its sphere of ideas, predestined
the Wanderbocher to become a Maggid, and it also explains why
the folk preacher is revered, indeed loved, by the lower Jewish
people, and can exert such powerful influence.</p>
    <p>Among them were outstanding figures, such as
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[144]" id="pgepubid00151"><a id="Seite_144" title="[144]"/></span>
for example, at the end of the 1840s, the Minsk Maggid R. N. K.,
and in the 1870s, the Kelm Maggid R. N. The former was an
outstanding Talmudist of the strictest character and presented
the truth to everyone; the latter was milder, more worldly.</p>
    <p>But they remained wanderers who preached every Sabbath in a
different town. They were not rich and mostly depended on
hospitality. They did not need to suffer hardship there, for it
is one of the most important principles that every wealthy
Balhabayis (householder) should invite a guest to his Sabbath
table. These guests usually arrived on Friday, the eve of the
Sabbath festival, when all work and also wandering ceased. The
moderation in eating and drinking throughout the week gives way
to lavish enjoyment. Since such a guest arrives hastily and late
in the evening in a place where Jews live and has no time to look
for an inn, he directs his first steps to the synagogue to pray.
It is the duty of the Shammes (synagogue attendant) to assign
these strangers, who are welcome for their news, to the citizens
of the town for the Sabbath. Now it happened once that the
mentioned Minsk Maggid came to a small town to darshan (preach)
there on Saturday. He arrived late on Friday evening, took the
path to the synagogue, where the Jewish community was already
gathered for prayer, Sabbath-calm and clean—some still with
wet hair from the bathhouse. The Maggid prayed along and was
firmly convinced that after the service, he too would receive a
Plät<a id="FNanchor_S_19"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="1084587126728857420_45488-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_S_19">[S]</a> (invitation). But how great was his astonishment, indeed
his fright, when he noticed that all other strangers were
distributed among the citizens and only he had been overlooked.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[145]" id="pgepubid00152">
        <a id="Seite_145" title="[145]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>All the citizens were already standing pressed tightly together
like sheep at the small, narrow exit door. He soon found himself
completely alone in the synagogue, without food and without
Kiddush. His desperate situation instilled courage in him. He
quickly jumped onto the “Bimah” (the raised platform in the
synagogue), energetically pounded a large prayer book with his
fist, and cried out loudly: “Raboissai (My masters)! Wait, stay,
I want to tell you something interesting!” In an instant, heads
turned towards the speaker—they had not noticed him before.
“I am an Oirach” (guest), he began, “arrived here before
evening, and as I see, the local dogs are more hospitable than
the local Balbatim (householders)!”</p>
    <p>These words naturally had the desired effect. Everyone was speechless with astonishment at first. And he continued: “I will tell you, listen: As I approached the town late in the evening, many dogs greeted me with lively barking. Each one pulled me to himself, each wanted me for himself alone. But here there are many more people gathered than dogs there, and no one thinks of inviting me to themselves, let alone fighting over me.” These words enraged the crowd, and one from the assembly stepped forward and shouted: “Who is this man, that he dares to compare us to dogs? Where have you come from, wretch?” A richly filled measure of not exactly fragrant words of endearment poured over the Maggid. But he did not remain silent either, he called out: “Wait, just wait a little, just listen to the end, I beg you.” Everyone became quiet again. “I am not finished yet. When the importunity of the dogs became a little uncomfortable for me, I bent down to the ground, grabbed a stone, and hurled <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[146]" id="pgepubid00153"><a id="Seite_146" title="[146]"/></span> it into the middle of the pack, which worked very well at first. The eagerness to possess me subsided, and the dogs fled. At first, I didn’t know which of them my stone had hit, but soon I saw and heard how a dog quickly, but limping on one foot and howling miserably, took flight with the rest of the company. Now I understood that my stone had hit him.”</p>
    <p>These words agitated the community even more. They pressed the speaker to reveal his name, and the assembled people were not a little ashamed to recognize in him the famous Maggid and sought to make amends through friendly, respectful treatment. On Saturday afternoon, he preached in the synagogue before the entire assembled community, which listened with pleasure and devotion to the speech of this pious man. He criticized many things, proclaimed hell for some sins, and the people wept. At the same time, he promised paradise for good deeds in this world, as in the life to come, and the people rejoiced, as he, with such great knowledge, moved hearts and understood how to evoke the noblest emotions. He also kindly urged honesty in trade, advised giving good measure and weight, recommended diligence to artisans, and conversely criticized laziness and arrogance, telling very good folk jokes, and called upon the people to honor the Sabbath, to thank G-d for this gift, as on this day every Jew could rest free from worry, devote themselves to spiritual enjoyment, and draw closer to G-d, their Creator, which they were prevented from doing throughout the week by work and worry....</p>
    <p class="pmb3">On Sunday, this revered, popular preacher departed, accompanied for a stretch of the way by many residents of the small town.</p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p class="break"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[147]" id="pgepubid00154">
        <a id="Seite_147" title="[147]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00155">In the New Town.</h2>
    <h3 id="pgepubid00156">I.<br/>

It was a beautiful sight ...<br/>
</h3>
    <p>It was a beautiful sight when Emperor Nicholas I stood amidst a brilliant retinue. His tall figure, brimming with health, towered over his surroundings. His military parade uniform, the tightly fitting frock coat with bright red cloth trim and cuffs, his chest decorated with many order stars, the massive epaulettes, the broad blue sash across his chest, the sword knot with the saber on his left side, the tricorn hat sitting askew on his head with its imposing white plume, gave his martial figure a truly extraordinary appearance. His face, with its regular features, clean-shaven double chin, and full, blond sideburns, expressed a benevolent, indeed a joyful excitement; his energetically flashing gray eyes also shone, while his rigid military posture expressed high self-confidence. To his right stood Crown Prince Alexander II, who at that time, in the year 1835, was still a young man. He was of tall, massive build and, in contrast to Emperor Nicholas I, who had light blond head and beard hair, had raven-black hair, a narrow black mustache, and eyes of the same color. His entire being radiated mildness and friendliness; no trace of the self-confidence of his imperial father! — Even then, as I can still well remember, the Crown Prince had won the hearts of all the surrounding crowd. And he justified this sympathy in 1861 as the liberator of the serfs.</p>
    <p>Surrounded by numerous generals, adjutants, and engineers, the princes stood on the so-called Tatar Mountain. The smooth, green lawn lay like a velvet carpet before their feet; and the dark blue dome of the sky arched over this imposing scene. The sun bathed it in a sea of light, which broke into a thousand rainbow colors in the diamond orders of the gold-embroidered official uniforms.</p>
    <p>This brilliant spectacle appeared to us children like an ethereal vision, as we stood next to our parents’ house, about a hundred fathoms from the aforementioned mountain. — Emperor Nicholas I pointed in various directions with his right hand. From the eager debates of the gentlemen, the surrounding crowd could surmise that an important question was being discussed: soon a general, then an adjutant, was sent down from the mountain, who inspected and surveyed our house, measured the green meadow surrounding the house and garden with a sazhen (Russian measure = 1 fathom), and then hurried back up the mountain to report.</p>
    <p>The gaping crowd exhausted itself in a thousand conjectures and attributed a thousand meanings to every hand movement of the Emperor — just not the correct one. Finally, it was learned that the entire terrain of the old city of Brest had been designated by Emperor Nicholas I for a first-class fortress! The full implications of this project would soon become clear to every citizen.</p>
    <p>A few months after the event described above, <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[149]" id="pgepubid00158"><a id="Seite_149" title="[149]"/></span> the homeowners of the city of Brest-Litauen were notified by an imperial ukase that all should have their houses appraised by a commission specially appointed for this purpose. The government would pay a compensation sum and also provide a plot of land four versts, which is 1.5-2 English miles, away from the old city. The news was received with horror. A certain premonition crept into the minds of the citizens that their ruin was imminent! — For my parents, this project became a catastrophe!... For not only our magnificent house, but also the large brick factory, which stood two versts behind the city, was to be torn down. This brickyard yielded large sums every summer, as my father had undertaken the delivery of many millions of bricks for the large barracks already under construction. — My father could only with difficulty overcome the initial shock of the new order. But he calmed down, like the other homeowners in the city, with the imperial assurance that the government would compensate for all damages. — The appraisal commission, which the government appointed, was to determine the value of all houses in the city of Brest-Litowsk, and the government promised to pay very honestly and well. — Then the devil sent one of his hellish messengers in the form of a shyster lawyer. A Jew by birth, he was very capable of conducting lawsuits and drafting petitions in <em class="gesperrt">Russian</em>, which in the 1830s, in still predominantly Polish Lithuania, only a few gifted individuals could do. However, despite these good qualities, this man was an epitome of the most common unscrupulousness. This subject soon managed to win the trust of all <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[150]" id="pgepubid00159"><a id="Seite_150" title="[150]"/></span> homeowners, as well as the appraisal commission, and everyone hastened to place their possessions, which mostly consisted of their houses, into his hands so that he could represent their interests before the commission. — However, it was not long before he fell out with both parties and denounced to a higher authority that all the commission’s appraisals were false! That there was a kernel of truth in this denunciation, I do not doubt. But the interests of my poor parents were innocently severely affected by this act of revenge. Since my father represented his case before the appraisal commission <em class="gesperrt">himself</em>, and the shyster lawyer did not get his way, my father also became a victim of the denunciations. It was not much longer before an order was issued by a higher government authority to halt the appraisal of the houses until a new investigative commission would arrive! Then a general lament arose! Every homeowner now knew that he would lose his property. And now we children heard no other conversation in the house, whether among family members or with guests, than about the impending demolition of our magnificent house and the brickyard. And every word was soaked with rage over the accursed shyster lawyer David, “the Black,” who had brought such severe distress upon the city of Brest-Litauen. As a result of Rosenbaum’s denunciation (that was his family name), a second order came shortly thereafter, stating that every homeowner should demolish his own house at his own expense to make room even faster, otherwise he would be fined. A very short deadline was set by which the houses <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[151]" id="pgepubid00160"><a id="Seite_151" title="[151]"/></span> had to be torn down. There was barely enough time to find an apartment in the New Town. Of course, new constructions were out of the question. The rich were no less helpless than the poor. Those who could raise cash hurried and paid triple to rent a new apartment. But they were only a quarter of the large number of inhabitants of the old city of Brest-Litauen; the large mass remained actually without shelter!</p>
    <p>The discussions about buying a house in the New Town of Brest-Litauen and the impending move gave us children many impulses and things to do. I shivered at the thought that I would soon have to part from my faithful playmates in the cheder and in our neighborhood from the suburb (Samuchawicz), with whom we had played so intimately, and that I should now leave the familiar corners in their houses and ours. I felt as strongly as any adult in our house that the entire life of my beloved parents would have to undergo a total upheaval. We hoped, however, that if the investigation proved the falsity of the denunciation, all damages would be compensated.</p>
    <p>But this investigation lasted no more and no less than fifteen years!... Time enough to drive some of the homeowners from their own dwellings, to rob them, and plunge them into the greatest misery!</p>
    <p>Many became beggars, many emigrated!</p>
    <p>Even now, a heartbreaking scene from those sad times comes to mind, filling me with dread! It was on an autumn day of that terrible year 1836, when the cloudy sky hung like molten lead over the earth and over the souls of the citizens of Brest-Litauen. <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[152]" id="pgepubid00161"><a id="Seite_152" title="[152]"/></span> The north wind blew cold and chased the street dust, which whirled the yellow, fallen leaves of the trees before it, into the eyes of pedestrians. I was just on my way home with my mother to the suburb (Samuchawicz). We had to pass the small, wretched houses of the neighborhood. There we heard a jumble of Yiddish and Russian speech, an argument in Russian, cursing in Yiddish jargon, and loud crying. My mother, leading me by the hand, stepped closer. It was a poignant tragedy unfolding before us. The set deadline for evacuation had expired. But since the inhabitants of the house had not yet found shelter, the unfortunates believed that they would still be able to stay in their old home. But they were mistaken. The police sent their officers with the order to press for evacuation and, in case of resistance, to literally drive the homeowners out of their houses! This harsh order was being carried out just as we entered the small house. The hostess, a sick, haggard, thin woman with a distorted face, packed her belongings into an old, green-painted chest. Her elderly husband held the smallest child in his arms. Next to him stood two more children, a boy of about nine years and a girl of six years, whose little hands and bare feet trembled, blue-red with cold, for their thin bodies were covered only with rags. On the table lay half a loaf of bread. In the oven, some logs were burning, or rather smoking, on which the meager meal was cooking. The family was just about to eat when the hellish messenger appeared and declared that there was no more room here for <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[153]"><a id="Seite_153" title="[153]"/></span> the inhabitants. Indeed, they should not dare to stay here even for this one day.</p>
    <p>There was no more time for the meal, and quickly they set about packing and gathering! Even in the poorest household, many items still have their value as long as they are not removed from their spot. But when they are moved from their place, the worn-out things fall apart, break. And where were these poor people to take their meager possessions if they had no shelter yet? They were now barely able to rent a small komerne (sleeping place).</p>
    <p>The woman, with sighs, complaints, cries, and curses, half-filled her chest with her wretched belongings and then took the little one from her husband’s arm. The old man, however, now began to pack his treasures — the large and small folios of the Talmud, the prayer books, which every Jew, no matter how poor, possessed at that time — and this man was a homeowner! Soon it was the turn of the Hanukkah lamp, the woman’s four brass Sabbath candlesticks, the hanging lamp, the Shabbos clothes, the long caftan, the silk belt, and the streimel (fur hat). The rest of the household items, the water barrel, the worm-eaten dining table, wooden benches, several wooden poles, etc., were thrown onto the floor, and the poor people stumbled over them again and again. It was terrible! — My mother stood with me at the door and encouraged these unfortunates with courage and faith in G-d, and also tried to appease the anger of the policeman, who then soon left.</p>
    <p>My mother reminded them of the pictures that, forgotten in the commotion, hung on the wall. There were Moses with the holy <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[154]" id="pgepubid00162"><a id="Seite_154" title="[154]"/></span> tablets on Mount Sinai, Jacob with his twelve sons, the twelve tribes of the Jewish people, and a picture of the Menorah, that seven-branched candelabrum that stood in the Temple in Jerusalem. “Mizrach” was printed on the picture (East in German), for every Jew stood facing East during prayer. In similar pictures, the Jew of that time sought to preserve his tradition, his former period of glory for his descendants! — At this admonition, the host raised his eyes, wanting to take down the pictures, but the hostess cried out to him with a voice choked with tears: “Let them stay here, these pictures!! What do we need them for in the komerne? It’s over for us! I am no longer a hostess; you are no longer a host; we no longer have our own little corner; let these pictures go to hell too, like our belongings! Oh G-d, why have you made me live through this Churban (destruction)!”</p>
    <p>The old man patiently continued packing. And when he had finished his sad work, he fetched a farmer’s wagon and loaded his belongings: the green-painted chest, which contained the most important utensils, the long wooden poles, and the bedding, in which the three children, trembling with cold, were laid. A ragged, padded blanket was thrown over the junk. — The man, as the stronger one, still had the courage to look around the desolate rooms, but found nothing more that would have been worth taking away; then he calmly and bravely lifted the windows, doors, and shutters from their hinges and carried them onto the wagon. “I’ll get some money for that,” he said.</p>
    <p>The house stood abandoned without doors, without windows — like a widow. A sight even more gripping than that of a <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[155]" id="pgepubid00163"><a id="Seite_155" title="[155]"/></span> burnt-out ruin. The clouds looked high into it, and the autumn wind howled through the dead rooms.</p>
    <p>And slowly, over the unpaved country road, the vehicle, sunk up to its wheels in mud, carried its broken, desperate occupants towards a hopeless future in the New Town.</p>
    <p>My mother called out a heartfelt “G-d help you” to the poor on their way. The hostess returned a “Be well.” The man wept. The children, however, accompanied this scene with loud cries; no one thought to calm them, for the sorrow of this moment constricted all thought. I, too, felt that a terrible fate was unfolding here, and tear after tear welled up in my eyes.</p>
    <p>At home, my mother recounted the scene she had just witnessed, and melancholy settled upon all household members. Each one had the painful feeling that a similar fate might soon befall us, perhaps even tomorrow.</p>
    <p>My married sisters knew well that they could no longer live with their parents, as their father would lose all his assets with the landed properties. They had to think about setting up their own homes. A new task that had been foreign and unknown to them until now, even though each already had a family, some children. Life with husband and little children had been so carefree, so comfortable here in the parental home. And now everything was to change! — Worry settled like a hundredweight stone on everyone’s hearts, although the authorities treated my father without any harshness during this terrible time, compared to the other town citizens. From time to time, they only asked him when he would move to the New Town, to which he could only <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[156]" id="pgepubid00164"><a id="Seite_156" title="[156]"/></span> say that he had not yet bought a house. But in the long run, the officials, even with the best will, could not let us live in the Old Town.</p>
    <p>One morning my father came from the New Town and declared that he would only rent an apartment for the time being. He had also found one; Mother should go see it. If she liked it, we could move to the New Town in a short time. I listened with great interest. Despite the sad scenes during our neighbors’ relocation, I felt a certain joyful excitement at the thought of the great, impending changes. Where adults shudder at the effort and inconvenience of a move, for children it holds a special charm and pleasure to move into a new home. An adult might want to flee from empty rooms, while every child jumps around in them with delight and happily listens to the echo of their loud words.</p>
    <p>My mother went to the New Town with one of her older daughters and looked at the apartment. She <em class="gesperrt">had</em> to like it.</p>
    <p>And soon it was time to pack and tidy up. Many pieces of our rich furniture had to be sold, as the small rooms in the New Town could not have accommodated them all. The move to the New Town was scheduled for a Tuesday. First, my married sisters with their families were to relocate.</p>
    <p>The appointed day arrived. We all had breakfast together — for the last time! — at the parental family table. Everyone was eloquently silent, overcome by feelings that are difficult to express in words! The sorrow of this moment was profound. The new situation was harder <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[157]" id="pgepubid00165"><a id="Seite_157" title="[157]"/></span> to bear than fire damage. Here, the force of the elements prevails — the hand we worship, even when it destroys! But to leave home and hearth in the best condition and to go from familiar intimacy into the uncertainty of a dark future is the torment of all torments!...</p>
    <p>After breakfast, the wagons were loaded with my sisters’ furniture. My older sister, Chenje Malke Günzburg, was carefully led to the street, as she had only recently given birth to a daughter. The small, delicate creature was nestled in cushions and blankets and brought into the wagon, where the two older children were already sitting. As if it were yesterday, I can still see the image of the old nanny, Raschke, lifting the baby from the cradle in the empty rooms to bring it to my sister in the wagon; many hot tears ran down her wrinkled cheeks....</p>
    <p>From that day on, the patriarchal life in my beloved parents’ house ceased! One member of the household detached after another.... Far different times came than we had lived until then, and never again did we children all come together under the father’s unrestricted guidance.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>It was also in those days that the Jewish cemetery was relocated to the New Town. With dismay and horror, the Jewish community in Brest learned that the earth, in which many thousands of human remains had rested for centuries, was to be used for the projected fortress constructions and that the old burial ground with its ancient gravestones was to be demolished. If the destruction of the Old Town of Brest was a financial ruin, then this news of the desecration <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[158]" id="pgepubid00166"><a id="Seite_158" title="[158]"/></span> of the graves had an utterly devastating effect on people’s minds. All efforts, petitions, pleas to let the dead rest were in vain. Useless; the authorities remained as relentless as fate and ordered the clearance of the cemetery.</p>
    <p>And it happened.</p>
    <p>The entire Jewish population, led by Rabbi Reb L. Katzenellenbogen, increased their prayers and fast days. Nothing helped. They finally had to submit to the cruel order. A day was set for this unprecedented funeral procession of many thousands to take place. The entire Jewish community, young and old, rich and poor, fasted on this day. Everyone wanted to participate in the arduous work. After the men, and many women too, had prayed with contrite hearts in the synagogue in the early morning — it was on a Monday, as I recall — and the section from the holy scroll had been read, the community went to the old burial ground and offered prayers there as well. Psalms were read, the dead were asked for forgiveness, as is customary at burials, and they began the sad work.</p>
    <p>One of the most terrible curses among Jews was: “May the earth cast out your bones!” And so, one saw the terrible curse fulfilled upon these bones!...</p>
    <p>Already a few days before, small bags of gray linen had been made, intended to hold the remains of the dead. And these small bags were perfectly sufficient to contain the entire person who was once so proud, so self-confident, so insatiable, so tireless in wishing and desiring — all of that now became a <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[159]" id="pgepubid00167"><a id="Seite_159" title="[159]"/></span> small pile of dust, barely a burden for <em class="gesperrt">one</em> hand.</p>
    <p>The entire community participated in pouring the contents of the exhumed graves into the small bags, tying them with a thick string, and stacking them onto the waiting wagons. Here there was no distinction; rank and social standing did not matter. All were equal. The entire populace was deeply moved by this act. Here, it was not one family mourning a relative, but an entire population mourning their desecrated dead.</p>
    <p>Finally, all the graves had been dug, many wagons loaded with
the light yet hundredweight-heavy contents and covered with
black cloths. The cantor intoned a prayer,
recited Kaddish (the usual prayer for the dead), and the large procession
began to move. Many followed the procession barefoot along the long
road from the Old Town to the New Town. Such a
funeral had never been seen before. The government
had provided military as an honor guard, partly perhaps
also because among the exhumed bodies were many
victims of a great epidemic. The soldiers marched
with rifles slung over their shoulders close beside the wagons; the townspeople
followed in deep silence.</p>
    <p>In the newly established cemetery, near the village of Bereswke
— six versts from the Old Town — the sacks containing the
bones of those whose graves had no tombstones
were interred in mass graves, while
the remains of the others were buried in individual graves,
on which the old stones were placed again. There one can still
read today the Hebrew inscriptions, which date back several centuries.
The tombstone of Rabbi Abraham Katzenellenbogen
reads in translation:</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[160]" id="pgepubid00168">
        <a id="Seite_160" title="[160]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <blockquote>
      <div>
        <p>“Here rests the great Rabbi, our Gaon and Teacher<br/>
Abraham ben David, former Rabbi in Brest,<br/>
Lithuania, died 1742.”</p>
      </div>
    </blockquote>
    <p>On another tombstone one reads:</p>
    <blockquote>
      <div>
        <p>“Open the gates and let the righteous enter!<br/>
Here rests the famous Gaon, the departed Josef<br/>
ben Abraham, may his memory be blessed. May his<br/>
soul be received into the realm of the Ever-Living!”</p>
      </div>
    </blockquote>
    <p>The year is blurred. On another stone
it says:</p>
    <blockquote>
      <div>
        <p>“Here rests the extraordinarily virtuous Rabbi and
Preacher, our teacher and leader, Kiwe’s son Moses,
departed Monday, on the eve of the Day of Atonement
5591 after the creation of the world. He has gone where
the light of his wisdom will shine eternally.... He
speaks to us in his works and lives on after his death....
The fragrance of his flowery language is
imperishable.”<a id="FNanchor_T_20"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="1084587126728857420_45488-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_T_20">[T]</a></p>
      </div>
    </blockquote>
    <p>It was already getting dark when the mass burial in the
new cemetery was over. After the work was completed,
the crowd dispersed silently again.</p>
    <p>That evening, great sorrow reigned in our house.
My parents were deeply affected by this difficult
day.</p>
    <p>Deeply moved, they were silent and withdrawn.
No one spoke, no sound was heard. Everyone was
preoccupied with their thoughts about death and the transience of
earthly life.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[161]" id="pgepubid00169">
        <a id="Seite_161" title="[161]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>On that day, the city of Brest could count many saints
who forgot all earthly things and recognized their transience.</p>
    <p>Perhaps this difficult day had a paralyzing effect on the
vitality of my dear father. He never truly
recovered from the heavy blow that tore him from his native soil.</p>
    <p>After fifteen years of many difficult lawsuits, my father
received a considerable sum of money from the government
for his landed property. But he was an old man, estranged from his
business and had become a true armchair scholar —
a scholar whose activity could only bear fruit in his study
among Talmudic folios.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">There were probably still various commissions for the fortress construction.
But it was as if my father had been torn from his native soil
— no more fruits would ripen.</p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p class="break"/>
    <h3 id="pgepubid00170">II.<br/>

A Sabbath.<br/>
</h3>
    <p>With the relocation from the old city of Brest in Lithuania
to the New Town, life in my parents’ house
took on a completely different form. While the old home,
from the guest room to the carriage house, was elegantly furnished,
here the small rooms were poor. True, it was
still the old mahogany furniture, impregnated with gold bronze,
that filled these small rooms, but oh, in what
condition! Faded, shabby. Pieces were already missing from some sets,
some tables limped on one leg,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[162]" id="pgepubid00171"><a id="Seite_162" title="[162]"/></span>
the backs of the chairs no longer offered secure support, the gold was scratched off
the frames of the large mirrors. But
a dwelling is always a reflection of its inhabitants! Both
showed that they had once seen pleasant days. The material
was solid at its core and had served well;
and had fate now cast a benevolent glance upon
people and furniture, they could have regained their old
luster! But fate was unkind for
a long, long time.</p>
    <p>However, that period was one of the most meaningful for my father.
It brought forth the nobility of his individuality.
He had more time and opportunity than before
to assist his neighbors with advice and action, to gain
love and respect in Jewish society through
his great Talmudic and other knowledge of
Hebrew literature.</p>
    <p>After he had liquidated all his businesses, he
devoted himself entirely to Talmudic study and lived “Al hatauro
w’al hoawaudo” (the teaching and the divine service)! The
day in our house was divided so that as much time was allotted
for Talmudic studies as for eating and sleeping.
Even here in the small apartment, his study was equipped with many
compartments, where many books had been added to the former library,
and there, in the early forties, he wrote the two works
of which I have already reported.</p>
    <p>Even in the new home, my father used to get up at 4 o’clock
in the morning, in summer as in winter, and perform his morning prayers
singing. These prayers had no coherent
melodies. They were more recitatives; but
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[163]" id="pgepubid00172"><a id="Seite_163" title="[163]"/></span>
to my loving child’s heart, they insinuated themselves like
the most beautiful melodies. To these sounds,
I used to wake up and dream in a deep, religious mood until
daybreak. One might, however, believe
that this way of life distanced my father from us children
and prevented serious upbringing. This is not the case, however.
He always still had time and inclination to show the greatest interest
in community affairs and to supervise the customs and
behavior of the children with his tender, paternal eyes and his wise words.</p>
    <p>Indeed, under the new circumstances, much had changed,
but our conduct, our measured self-awareness
towards the whole world, did not change, even though
with the loss of the great fortune in the Old Town, i.e.,
with the demolition of our house and the brickworks, the
prosperity of my parents had been severely shaken.
Many of the precious things disappeared from the house,
but the more precious personality of everyone in the house remained.
Our house also remained the gathering point for intelligent
society. Every distinguished guest who came to the city of Brest
first came to us, where he was sure to be warmly welcomed. —</p>
    <p>Our clothing was simple under the present circumstances,
yet none of the children were envious of their friends’
expensive costumes. Life in the house
flowed regularly and comfortably even now. The six weekdays
passed without particularity. Friday, however, showed a
different face, for preparations for the Sabbath were already made in the
kitchen before daybreak, the wonderful,
large challahs and various cakes were baked,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[164]" id="pgepubid00173"><a id="Seite_164" title="[164]"/></span>
whereupon I willingly helped the cook and received the first sweet
to eat. I was already 14 years old at the time. — Early
in the day, the household members got up. We had for breakfast
warm white bread with butter and coffee. I wrote a
note on which all errands for the Sabbath, all purchases
in the market were listed, armed myself with a
hand basket and napkin, and went to the marketplace,
where my primary attention was given to the first errand,
the fish, the foundation of a proper Sabbath!
My father placed great value on good fish. I bought the
freshest pike, which is especially favored among us Jews,
then went to the fruit stalls and walked quickly
home, where I found my mother reading the Sabbath portion.
Upon my appearance, however, she put the Bible
aside and examined my purchases. My father also came
from his study, inspected the fish, was mostly
satisfied, admonished me to add a lot of pepper when cooking,
and anticipated a good appetite; and after I
handed the fish to the cook for cleaning, I tied
a long apron around myself, quickly set about washing
my father’s handkerchiefs, collars, and muslin sleeves,
which still had to be dried and ironed before evening for my parents’
Sabbath attire. Then it was the fish’s turn. My father loved
to watch the procedure, and smilingly praised my skill, tasted
the sauce, and again urged to add more pepper.
After much tasting and trying, the fish was ready.
I placed it on the platter, set it
on a pot of hot water so that the sauce would not dry out.
Once again, the vegetables were tasted, the missing ingredients
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[165]"><a id="Seite_165" title="[165]"/></span>
added, and then the cook was given her place at the stove.
From there I went to the tea table, where I prepared and poured
tea for my parents and siblings. On Friday,
it was taken earlier than usual and drunk in a hurry.
Afterwards, I went through all the rooms to put the finishing
touches on the cleaning, adjusting one piece of furniture or another,
removing dust from the corners, etc. Meanwhile, the small laundry had dried.
I started ironing. Afterwards, I distributed the large laundry to
my parents and siblings. Everyone in the house
prepared for Sabbath. Mine consisted in winter of
a small blue woolen dress, my favorite color;
in summer, a stiffly ironed calico dress.
Youth had to replace velvet and silk for me.</p>
    <p>My parents, dressed in clothes reserved only for the Sabbath,
went to the synagogue, my mother, however, only after
she had covered the table with a white tablecloth,
placed the two Sabbath loaves on the upper seat, which she
covered with a beautifully embroidered cloth made especially for this purpose, then
the candles were lit with a blessing, remembering
the other two commandments for every Jewish woman. She
thanked G-d in this prayer that it was her destiny to
illuminate the rooms for the Sabbath feast. While she was in the
synagogue, we three girls also had the duty to light
two more candles each on Friday evening in the dining room
chandelier. Candles were also lit in the wall sconces in the other rooms. And
soon the whole house radiated in the glow of candles. We girls
in fresh Sabbath attire felt ourselves in the cleaned rooms
in that mood of which the Chassidim say that
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[166]" id="pgepubid00174"><a id="Seite_166" title="[166]"/></span>
Heaven bestows the “Neshama Yetera,” the second soul, for Sabbath.
This time was the only one in the week when we girls,
without being disturbed, could sing our Russian, Polish, German,
and Jewish songs with full, strong voices.
Another time we danced, for which our neighbors’ children
joined us. Prayer was not forgotten either!
Meanwhile, the servant set the table for dinner.
At Father’s place, I put the large silver goblet with the
carafe of wine. We awaited our parents from the synagogue.
Father came, and as soon as he called out “Good Sabbath” with his strong voice,
the whole Sabbath coziness entered our home.
He spread his hands, and we children,
the older ones first, received the blessing. Father’s face radiated
with happy Sabbath peace, the peace of the soul rested in his smiling countenance.
Worries and sorrows, by which he had been so greatly afflicted recently,
were banished, forgotten — by him
and his house. He prayed over our heads bowed with love and reverence,
while he often pressed and stroked it in his hands.
However, a kiss and similar tender expressions
were never allowed, as religiosity and moral views at that time
condemned them as frivolities.</p>
    <p>After we all received Father’s blessing,
Father and the other gentlemen sang verses called “Shalom Aleichem”
— Peace be with you — with which every Jew
receives his Sabbath peace angel. This is followed by the hymn of praise
to the industrious housewife (Psalm 18), the “Eshet
Chayil,” the woman of valor. The woman who rises while it is still
night and prepares food for her husband and children and household,
her handiwork and red woven belts
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[167]" id="pgepubid00175"><a id="Seite_167" title="[167]"/></span>
are praised in the city gates. She is a crown to her husband.
But beauty and grace are vain trifles, fleeting, and only
the G-d-fearing woman receives all praise. These songs the men
used to sing, pacing up and down the room, in a beautiful
melody. I was a teenager then and used to feel quite proud
during these songs, as I understood half of them, and resolved to become
worthy of the praise myself. — My father made “Kiddush,” drank half the contents
of the cup and gave it to Mother, who sipped from it, and then passed it to us
children in turn. Then, without a word, we proceeded to wash our hands;
and a prayer was said while drying. This act, which despite the many present,
was performed so quietly, often tempted us children to
soft whispering, and even more often to a very seductive giggle.
But a stern glance from Father banished all mischief.
Father said a prayer over the two loaves of bread, which are called “Lechem
Mishneh,” cut one into two parts, ate a bite from it,
and spoke no word until he had consumed it. We
all at the table also received a slice. The fish was
served, a pious Sabbath hymn with lovely melodies
was sung. Then followed the rich, tasty noodle soup;
then a second song, which we girls hummed softly.
We were not allowed to do it loudly, as it was considered a sin for men
to hear female voices singing! The meal ended with a vegetable.
Finally, a dessert was served
consisting of apples, roasted nuts, and boiled peas.
The caps were put on anew, water was poured over the
fingers, which is called “Mayim Acharonim,” i.e., the last
water. With the recitation of the grace after meals,
one of the gentlemen of the company was honored, for whom a
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[168]"><a id="Seite_168" title="[168]"/></span>
cup of wine was filled, and all joined in with an Amen
at a specific point. After dinner, they did not stay together
much longer; by ten o’clock, the whole house was in
deep sleep.</p>
    <p>My father, true to his habit, woke up at 4 o’clock
in the morning, but since he could not light a candle himself
because of the Sabbath, he called the servant and ordered him to tell
the Christian night watchman to bring light into the house.
The servant soon brought “Michalka,” the trusted
night watchman, who lit the candle in Father’s study and in the
kitchen for the servant. Father sang his morning prayers,
leafed a little through the large Talmudic folio, drank
his tea, which, prepared yesterday, had remained hot until morning
on the large kitchen stove in the hot sand. (The
samovar was never set up in my parents’ house on Saturday,
nor was coffee or any other food cooked
or warmed.) And now my father, in the dark
night, in winter, heedless of the deep snow and frost,
went to the so-called “Chevra Tehillim Bet Midrash,” which
derives its name from the practice of reciting all Psalms
from beginning to end every week. Every day a part
was sung in chorus, with one member of the congregation beginning with the first
sentence of the chapter and the congregation following him. My
father belonged to this association, but participated in the
singing only on Saturday. The members of this association consisted
mostly of craftsmen, for whom it is impossible during the entire
week to indulge in this spiritual pleasure in the early morning hours.
But today is the holy Sabbath day of rest,
which already began yesterday before evening. Every Jew
had already rested in deep sleep yesterday at 9 p.m.,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[169]" id="pgepubid00176"><a id="Seite_169" title="[169]"/></span>
awoke physically and spiritually strengthened at 4 a.m.
and joyfully thought of his community in the “bet midrash,”
where he immediately went, and where he met his comrades
in the brightly lit, well-warmed, spacious house of prayer.
No specific melody is prescribed for these Psalms,
but every Jew gives the words of the
Psalms, which he fully understands and deeply feels, and in which
he finds his own experiences, the appropriate melody himself,
because it comes from his innermost soul; and with these individual
tones he praises and sings Hallelujah to his Creator.
This continued until daybreak, when the morning prayer “Shacharit”
and the midday prayer “Musaf” were recited, and in between
the weekly portion from the Torah was read. Around
11 a.m., each member of the congregation then went home
in the best of spirits, not least because he knew
that a tasty lunch awaited him from yesterday.
Everyone delighted in “cholent” and “kugel,” which the
Sabbath angel had cooked so splendidly. This cholent, of
which Heinrich Heine claimed that the inhabitants of Olympus
in Greece only ate ambrosia because they knew nothing of
cholent! — We children were already in full
Sabbath attire. Father blessed us and made Kiddush over
a cup of wine. We also had to sip from it. Then
we “bit into” honey cake and preserves in honey and sugar.</p>
    <p>Meanwhile, the servant brought out salted, cold fish,
hard-boiled eggs with onion salad, goose liver, goose fat,
radishes, calves’ feet with eggs and garlic; the bitter,
spicy herbs, on which our ancestors already refreshed themselves in
the desert, still delight the descendants of
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[170]" id="pgepubid00177"><a id="Seite_170" title="[170]"/></span>
Jacob today. After the company at the table had satisfied their initial hunger,
the cholent was served. It tasted
excellent! Although the dishes had been in the oven for more than 20 hours,
everyone enjoyed them. The Jewish stomachs of that time
were good. The fatter the “kugel,” the symbol
of the Sabbath midday meal, the tastier it seemed
to the table companions, and it found favor! Even today,
pious songs, hymns to the Sabbath rest, were sung
in cheerful melodies in chorus. To sleep after the meal on Sabbath
is a “mitzvah” and — we were pious! Only we children
could now let off steam, in the dining room during winter,
on meadows, mountains, and valleys in summer.</p>
    <p>In the late afternoon, the men went back to the house of prayer
for the evening prayer. It was at dusk. At home,
the third Sabbath meal then had to be eaten. The
children, too, had ravenous appetites after their romping around. At
this “Shalosh Seudot” in the semi-darkness before evening, fish
and meat had to be eaten according to custom. Even now,
beautiful hymns were sung, and then the grace after meals was recited.
Thereupon, everyone went back to the synagogue for the evening prayer,
and it was already dark when the men returned. Then
my father prayed “Havdalah” over a cup of wine.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Then further melodious “Zemirot” were sung,
i.e., verses referring to the coming week (weekdays),
to the sun, moon, and stars. — The evening was still
a half-holiday, during which no work was done. Around
11 o’clock, another meal was eaten, which was called
“Reb Chidke’s Seudah” — Melaveh Malka — farewell prayer for
Queen Sabbath. For this meal, a
“borscht,” a broth consisting of poultry and red beets,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[171]" id="pgepubid00178"><a id="Seite_171" title="[171]"/></span>
was cooked, which was only ready at 11 o’clock, as one was only allowed to light a fire
when it was completely dark.
Everyone, even us small children, had to come to the table for this late meal.
The Sabbath celebration only ended with this late meal.</p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p class="break"/>
    <h3 id="pgepubid00179">III.<br/>

Eva’s Wedding.<br/>
</h3>
    <p>I was 15 years old when my sister, two years my senior,
<em class="gesperrt">was engaged</em>. Yes, she <em class="gesperrt">was engaged</em> and not (as girls
now say) they got engaged. Our
parents and the groom’s parents negotiated through the
matchmaker “shadchan” with each other and discussed
how much dowry, clothes, and jewelry should be given by both parties
to the marriage. My sister did not get to see
her groom, her life partner, at all at first
and could not convince herself whether she could love him,
and whether he would correspond to her taste and the ideals
that a girl secretly forms of her future husband.
Our parents only informed her that a certain Mr. F.
from the city of S. was courting her. And since he was from a good family,
rich, not ugly, and already an independent merchant
(though already divorced once), our parents
found this match suitable and gave their consent. Now
my sister was also to do so. Far from casting the slightest
doubt on her parents’ words, my sister
made no objections. What the parents decided,
one simply agreed with! That she was satisfied with the choice
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[172]" id="pgepubid00180"><a id="Seite_172" title="[172]"/></span>
was self-evident; it was customary to marry off daughters
in this manner and — they were happy in marriage.
The girls of yesteryear knew that the man whom
their <em class="gesperrt">parents</em> chose for them was chosen by <em class="gesperrt">G-d</em>. G-d
willed that he become her life partner, and so one submitted
from the first moment to all the destinies of married life with
patience and resignation, arranging one’s thoughts and actions accordingly. Thus,
the marriage of husband and wife at that time was regarded as a <em class="gesperrt">sacred</em>
bond that only death could separate, and not
as now, where marriage is based merely on the good <em class="gesperrt">will</em> of the spouses.
In a marriage concluded in the old way, disputes or disagreements
between spouses rarely occurred;
mostly they led a happy, contented life
until old age, and such a life was also granted to my
sister by dear G-d.</p>
    <p>So my sister became a bride, received beautiful diamonds
as a gift from her groom and very
often letters, to which she immediately replied. The correspondence
was not without a certain inner involvement, attachment,
and love, but by no means effusive. Nevertheless,
it expressed that they longed for each other
and eagerly awaited and received letters.</p>
    <p>Thus five months passed. One morning, as my mother sat with all of us at the breakfast table, she said to my sister: “I hope your wedding will take place in three months.” My sister turned pale at her mother’s words. The mother began to soothe her with endearing words. With smiling faces, yet quite serious, she said: “It’s time, you are already eighteen years old!” But my sister answered
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[173]" id="pgepubid00181"><a id="Seite_173" title="[173]"/></span>
nothing, quickly rose from her chair, went into her room, where she began to sob violently. One could easily guess what feelings had forced this stream of tears from her. Our mother, at any rate, attached no further importance to it. My sister herself probably couldn’t account for her tears. Perhaps wounded pride had forced them; she didn’t even know her groom personally and was only to see him at the wedding.</p>
    <p>Now the wedding preparations began. First, the wardrobe! Fabrics, materials, linen, etc., were brought from the shops. But my sister seemed to care little about it. She became thoughtful, quiet, and walked around introspective. My mother and older sisters ordered the sewing work. The bride, however, now wrote more often to her groom, probably to regain her shaken composure. The replies were very amiable.</p>
    <p>Our parents and the groom’s parents set the wedding date at the engagement for a Thursday in September 1848. (It was a Rosh Chodesh.) I was to get a long dress for this wedding — as an older girl in the house, consequently also a candidate for marriage. The household and wedding preparations kept me very busy. For days I was in the kitchen baking, roasting, and cooking. But I loved this activity, while my sister preferred reading and sewing. My older sisters took care of the household goods and the bride’s clothing. She received a light-purple silk dress, adorned with white lace trim, as her wedding dress, a myrtle wreath
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[174]" id="pgepubid00182"><a id="Seite_174" title="[174]"/></span>
and a long veil. (The outfit was strikingly modern compared to the customs of the time!) The Saturday before the set date was the Polterabend, then called “smires.” All friends and acquaintances came, and we were merry and danced until we were tired, as we girls also had to introduce the gentlemen. Our religious upbringing forbade dancing with a man. Father and the known gentlemen watched and delighted in the beautiful sight of the solo dance of the Russian “Kasatzke,” which is so rich in artistic dance figures, graceful movements, and turns. Soon it was the turn of the rapidly danced Galoppade, danced in pairs around the salon, with a momentary stop made in each of the four corners of the room. In between also came the cheerful dance Bègele, a kind of round dance, then “chosidl,” to which a very lively tune with fanfare music and tambourine was played. Finally, the Contredanse was also danced very gracefully and politely. The waltz, however, was not particularly popular.</p>
    <p>The days from Saturday to Thursday were restless and full of work. But every evening of these days, music came to play a “good evening” for the bride, a “dobri weczer,” and every morning we heard a “good morning serenade,” “dobri dsen,” during which we girls performed a cheerful little dance. The patriarchal custom, which demands that a Jewish wedding should last four weeks, prevailed entirely. My sister hoped that her groom would arrive at least two days before the wedding and had become livelier in the last few days. However, as Wednesday of the last week approached, and her
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[175]" id="pgepubid00183"><a id="Seite_175" title="[175]"/></span>
hope was not fulfilled, she became upset and often cried in secret, and her whole being spoke of impatience. The wedding preparations continued, and the appointed wedding day, a Thursday, dawned with splendid weather and sunshine — yet without bringing the groom to our town.</p>
    <p>But scarcely had it turned 11 o’clock when a courier brought the impatiently awaited, joyful news that the groom and his entourage had arrived at the last post station and were continuing their journey. We dressed in haste; breakfast was prepared. I had to help and therefore only half finished my festive attire. The bride, however, did not want to dress until she had spoken to her groom — a demand that sounds only fair and reasonable to us today. Yet, a stern look from our mother and a word from the sisters were sufficient to make her abandon this demand. Soon the sister appeared dressed as a bride; she had, of course, barely looked in the mirror! Her sighs hinted at the storm of her emotions! It was in the force of the customs of that time that she became calmer and resigned herself to seeing her life partner for the first time only in her wedding dress.</p>
    <p>It had turned 12 o’clock. The invitations for the wedding ceremony to friends and acquaintances had been sent out early that same day, and some guests had already arrived. Music sounded, and our parents, with serious faces, moved hearts, and tearful eyes, entered the wedding hall, holding the youthful, beautifully adorned, agitated bride by the arm in their midst. My sister was not an outspoken beauty, but her tall stature, her proud,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[176]" id="pgepubid00184"><a id="Seite_176" title="[176]"/></span>
towering head, high forehead, and intelligent eyes suggested her intellect. The seriousness of this hour seemed to her to be illuminated by a romantic glow, casting over her stern features the gentle devotion and resignation that we had missed in her recently. — My father had meanwhile greeted the groom in his lodging, and he could assure my sister with conviction that the young man was an amiable person. To the sounds of music moving to tears, as is customary and appropriate on such occasions, our parents led the bride to the center of the wedding hall, where an armchair with a footstool stood on a carpet, and with tear-filled eyes, they let the bride down from their arms onto it. She remained seated, thoughtful, introspective. Anxious anticipation, joyful excitement, the thought of binding herself for life, raged through her..... Oh! A woman’s life!... How much this one word says... The father withdrew, but the mother and all of us, richly adorned, remained near her. It was only a short time before we heard the servant announce from the anteroom that the groom had arrived. My mother rose and cast a restless, but maternally proud glance at the bride, who looked pale and rigid straight ahead. She spoke words of tender encouragement to her once more and then went into the second salon to receive the welcome guests. The father met them already in the anteroom, embraced and kissed the groom, and led him into the second room to the mother, who, according to the custom of the time, was not allowed to express her joy or satisfaction either by a handshake or a kiss. But her eyes
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[177]"><a id="Seite_177" title="[177]"/></span>
and her hasty words said that she was satisfied. The groom seemed to pay little attention to the father’s tender embrace and the mother’s kind words; his eyes eagerly and intently sought the one his heart longed for. He looked past everyone standing next to him into the second salon, from where the star of his future life shone towards him. The wedding guests, led by our father, now went into the wedding room. My sister had risen from her chair and stood in her full dignity opposite the groom, her eyes steadily fixed on him, before whose gaze he, I think, had to lower his own, as his character was yielding, gentle, and peaceful, and hers, though possessing little sentimentality, was robustly healthy, cold, bright like a winter’s day. Even between bride and groom, no handshake was allowed to be exchanged on this solemn occasion. Her entire appearance, however, had an electrifying effect on him; he could barely compose himself and mumbled some incomprehensible words, to which my sister gave a measured reply. The bridal couple was allowed to go into the second room, initially accompanied by both sets of parents, who, by the way, soon withdrew so that the young people could finally speak to each other <em class="gesperrt">without witnesses</em>. If the dictum: “Came, saw, conquered” is justified anywhere, it is here! Barely half an hour passed before the young people returned to the wedding hall, beaming with joy.</p>
    <p>They hastened to have breakfast; it took place in a large company and in a very lively manner. The crowd of invited guests was already gathering; and since it was late autumn and the day was short, they had to hurry. Meanwhile, it had turned three
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[178]" id="pgepubid00185"><a id="Seite_178" title="[178]"/></span>
o’clock. Dancing took place in the wedding hall, and the bride was also drawn into the whirl, which was perfectly in order according to the notions of the time. The groom asked for permission to remain in the dance hall; it was granted, but not for long! Our mother showed herself much milder than the father on similar occasions. She sat down in a corner of the wedding hall and asked her future son-in-law to take a seat beside her.</p>
    <p>An hour might have passed in dance and merriment when my mother reminded the groom that it was time to leave. He did so with a very deep bow and a smile towards the bride. And now began the ceremony of the so-called “Besetzen und Bedecken” (placing and covering), which consists of taking the bridal wreath and veil from the bride’s head, and the women and friends loosening the bride’s hair, which had been specially braided into small plaits for today, and spreading it over her neck and shoulders, while the music played only soft tones. The wedding party, which had been dancing so merrily just a little while ago, became quiet. A sad mood enveloped everyone. The Batchen or Marschalik — as these occasional speakers were then called — reminded the bride that this day marked a new chapter in her life; she was entering a new stage, and this day should be as sacred to her as the Day of Atonement. She should implore G-d to forgive her sins. The Jew of that time believed that parents were responsible before G-d for the sins of every child until their marriage. After the wedding, however, each child is responsible for themselves. My sister needed no admonition! Her tears flowed abundantly and sincerely. After this speech, accompanied by parents and guests,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[179]" id="pgepubid00186"><a id="Seite_179" title="[179]"/></span>
led by the local rabbi, the groom entered the wedding hall, took the veil from the prepared platter filled with hops and flowers, and at the rabbi’s request, covered the deeply moved bride’s head with it. During this act, all bystanders sprinkled him with hops and flowers, and amidst loud congratulations, embraces, and lively music, another good half hour passed, during which the bride was relieved of her heavy bridal attire, dressed in a light, bright gown, had a light mantilla draped over her, and had the veil adjusted and fastened on her head. Now they proceeded to the synagogue, not in carriages as now, but on foot through the often very dirty streets. — The wedding ceremony is considered a public act by Jews and must therefore be performed outdoors. The people should be able to see the bride and groom, perhaps someone knows that one of the couple is already married!</p>
    <p>Soon after the “covering,” the groom was led with music — a march was played — to the synagogue, where he was placed under the canopy erected there. And the musicians now also accompanied the bride under the “Chuppah” with the same march. The bride was placed by the “Unterführerinnen” (bridesmaids) to the left side of the groom; the music fell silent. The ceremony of consecrating the bridal couple began. The “Schammes” (synagogue attendant) filled a glass with wine, over which a respected man was honored to pronounce the blessing. At a certain sentence, he paused. The synagogue attendant handed the groom the wedding ring, which he held up, and with the legal words in a specific rhythm: “Hare ad mekudesches
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[180]" id="pgepubid00187"><a id="Seite_180" title="[180]"/></span>
li betabas sukedas Mausche w’ Isroel” he placed the ring on the index finger of the bride’s right hand. Then the man blessing the wine recited the so-called “shiva brachot” — the 7 blessings — on the most beautiful virtues and noblest emotions of the human heart, such as love, friendship, fidelity, and brotherhood of the married couple. Then the “ketubah” (marriage contract) was read aloud. This read as follows: “This Mr. N. marries this Miss N. He undertakes to be her husband, to nourish her, to clothe her appropriately to her status, and to protect her. She receives thirty gold coins from Mr. N.” The “ketubah” is handed to the bride here under the “chuppah.” After the prayer over the wine was finished, the groom and bride had to drink from the glass. The glass, however, was placed on the ground, and the groom had to smash it with his foot! The wedding party shouted “Mazel Tov” (Good Luck), and the bridal couple walked arm in arm on their way home, accompanied by the boisterous, deafening fanfare music and the entire public, with the older women in particular dancing a round dance close in front of the bridal couple, for the greatest “Mitzvah” (i.e., a deed pleasing to G-d) was considered: “M’ssameach chosen wekalo” (i.e., to amuse the bride and groom!). They danced all the way to our house. There the music fell silent, and now it was a matter of seeing to it, and partly bringing about, that the bride stepped over the threshold first. An old superstition taught that whoever of the married couple first stepped over the threshold would maintain the upper hand in married life throughout their lives. All the women took off their jewelry and placed it here on the threshold; the newly married couple was to step over it. Here with us, all these customs took place
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[181]"><a id="Seite_181" title="[181]"/></span>
in a comfortable order, while among the common people on this occasion, it very often came to a scuffle, in which the bride’s relatives soon tried to fight for precedence for their protégé, while the groom’s relatives, for their part, practiced the same maneuver.</p>
    <p>Imagine this entire “Chuppah-walk” (wedding procession) with all the scenes described above in rainy weather outdoors, where few of the dancers possessed umbrellas. There were sloppy women’s skirts and slippers, and the poor bride had to loudly hear the bitterest reproaches, because if it rained at her “chuppah,” she must have been fond of sweets and licked from the casseroles. —</p>
    <p>In a great throng, the bridal couple arrived home, where the young couple was led to their room and recovered from the exertions of the Chuppah-walk with tea, bouillon, and delicacies. It was high time too! For the bridal couple fasted until after the ceremony. The first bouillon given to the bridal couple was called the “golden soup.” Only the more intimate friends and the bridesmaids were allowed into the bridal couple’s room. The remaining guests took their leave to return two hours later for supper, which was called “chuppewetschere.” During this meal, the company engaged in all sorts of frivolous conversations, not lacking in levity. After the luxurious meal, which ended with a great carousal, the company remained seated at the table. It was customary for the groom to spice up the meal with a Talmudic discourse (Droshe). Now the “Droshe gifts,” i.e., wedding gifts, were presented to the newlyweds by relatives, parents, and friends. — The “batchen”
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[182]" id="pgepubid00188"><a id="Seite_182" title="[182]"/></span>
was back in action. But he now showed a more convivial side. He had to entertain the audience with all sorts of antics and improvised anecdotes in verse, say a witty “little word” to each guest, depending on the donation, and finally tell the bridal couple jokes, but also bitter truths in a humorous form. Among these Batchonim, there were often ingenious people. One, Sender (Alexander) Fiedelmann, left behind a delightful collection of his witty verses. Fiedelmann “worked” in Minsk, while in Wilna, a certain Motche Chabad and Elijokum Batchen were popular.</p>
    <p>The “batchen” stood on a chair and, holding the wedding gift handed to him aloft, called out the name of the giver and praised the value and special qualities of the gift with many exaggerations. He delivered his “Chochmes” in singing recitatives, at which the tipsy company at the table laughed heartily. These antics lasted until late into the night. The grace after meals was said, which ended with the “shiva brachot” over a cup of wine, from which the bridal couple was given a sip. Then came the so-called Kosher Dance. The bride, under her veil, was seated in the middle of the bridesmaids, one of whom held a silk, square handkerchief. The “batchen” invited one of the gentlemen to dance with the bride, with the bridesmaid giving one corner of the handkerchief to the bride and the second corner to the dancer. In this way, they made two rounds, and the Batchen called out: “Already danced!” and the bride sat down again among the bridesmaids. In this manner, the bride danced with all
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[183]" id="pgepubid00189"><a id="Seite_183" title="[183]"/></span>
the gentlemen present. This lasted until late after midnight. The poor bride, however, was not allowed to lift her veil.... Finally, before dawn, great fatigue urged them to rest. Everyone sought out a spot and blissfully dozed off. The next morning, it was late in the day. The bride remained in her room until my mother and older sisters arrived, accompanied by a simple woman, the so-called “Gollerke.” This woman was armed with large scissors and, at my mother’s command, boldly took possession of my sister’s poor head, leaned it against her chest, and under her murderous scissors, one strand after another of my sister’s beautiful hair soon fell from her head — as the law commands! After barely 10 minutes, the lamb was shorn. Only a little hair was left over her forehead, so it could be better smoothed back. For no trace of her own hair was allowed to show. Then she received a smoothly fitting silk cap, with a wide, silk headband in the color of her hair at the front, which, according to the concepts of the time, imitated hair very well. In pious Jewish homes, like my parents’, the old Jewish customs, which over time came to be regarded as law, were observed as strictly as possible. The bride was given a pretty, coquettish cap, even if her youthful face appeared significantly older beneath it. She was led into the salon, where all the gentlemen of the house and many guests were already gathered. The bridesmaids covered her face with a white, silk cloth, and whoever wanted to see her face for the first time under the cap had to give alms for the poor; the groom and both sets of parents also had to do so. There were various opinions
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[184]"><a id="Seite_184" title="[184]"/></span>
about her changed appearance, and soon a friendly dispute was underway. —</p>
    <p>My sister remained living with us and her husband at our parents’ expense. His parents, after leaving her many lovely presents, traveled back to their hometown of Zaslav.</p>
    <p>And a young couple lived the old life....</p>
    <p>Only this sister was engaged and married in the manner described here. My own engagement, two years later, had a significantly different character, as the reform under the reign of Nicholas I had strongly influenced the Jewish way of life.</p>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p class="break"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[185]" id="pgepubid00190">
        <a id="Seite_185" title="[185]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00191">The Change in Traditional Dress.</h2>
    <p>It seems to me that it cannot be a coincidence that today the word “Tracht” (traditional dress/costume) has almost entirely disappeared from the vocabulary. It is actually only common in written language now. In spoken language, it is hardly heard anymore. It has had to give way to the word “Mode” (fashion). But it seems to me that there is more to this than just a purely superficial replacement of one word by another. There is psychology, zeitgeist psychology, in this change. Can it really be just a coincidence that the word “Mode” is mostly used in a very precise sense? If it originally only denoted that something — a piece of clothing, a book, a work of art — was particularly popular at a certain time, it now primarily signifies the dominance of a particular style of clothing! Spring fashion simply denotes the new form that clothing takes in spring. And when “a new fashion comes out” again, one thinks merely of a new traditional dress. With the concept of fashion, the idea of rapid change is linked to us as if by a fixed association of ideas. What is modern only seeks the success of a day. Fashion and traditional dress relate to each other like hasty change and permanence.</p>
    <p>In one point, however, the concepts of “fashion and traditional dress” find a certain agreement! They both have an imperative character. They force under a yoke. And
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[186]" id="pgepubid00192"><a id="Seite_186" title="[186]"/></span>
even if an individual retains some leeway for the exercise of their individual taste, the law of traditional dress nevertheless demands uniformity and standardization.</p>
    <p>In earlier times, traditional dress also had the task of differentiating certain groups of people from one another. Parisian fashion had not yet blurred all finer and coarser nuances. Every tribe, every sharply separated class of people had its own traditional dress; one did not want to disappear into the great human melting pot, but rather to be immediately recognized for what one was. Thus, traditional dress acquired the character of the tenacious, stable, traditional, and the halo of venerability illuminated it.</p>
    <p>Only in this way can one understand how the Ukase published by the Russian government in 1845 affected Russian Jews, which forced Jews to abandon their old traditional dress and conform to modern styles.</p>
    <p>The effect on the great masses was as terrible as that of a catastrophe. Wild bitterness was the result. And only the feeling of their own powerlessness, defenselessness, the fear of exile (Golusangst) prevented this bitterness from escalating into raging fury. If the Jews had been strong, organized, and powerful at that time, the change in dress would have led to uprisings and revolutions. As it was, it remained a painful resignation. People mourned their own traditional dress as they would a dear departed one. And more insightful minds soon understood that adapting to fashionable clothing was only the first step on the path to deeper assimilations, which would have to reshape not only their way of life but also cultural views and the traditional teachings of a specific
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[187]" id="pgepubid00193"><a id="Seite_187" title="[187]"/></span>
religion, customs, habits, and practices of the Jewish people. The ukaz was referred to as “Gesere”; not as one of the many *geserot* that befell the Jewish people, but as *the* “Gesere” par excellence. Many were of the opinion that Jewish law — *Yehoreg ve’al ya’avor* (one must sacrifice oneself) — had to be fulfilled under these circumstances. However, the Russian government cared little about Jewish laws, about the agitated debates in the communities, about the mourning and lamentations of the pious, but simply set a deadline, after which all Jews in Russia, men and women, were only allowed to be seen in European-Russian attire. And this deadline was, of course, very short. Thus, the Jewish population had to abandon their beloved traditional dress. And whoever, like me, has witnessed the rapid change of fashions over many decades, and how I have often had to recognize that the tyrant Fashion does not always have aesthetics as its companion, must confess that the sacrifice of the old attire was, in many respects, the abandonment of a dress that was not only hygienic but also quite becoming.</p>
    <p>The men wore a white shirt, the sleeves of which were fastened with ribbons. At the neck, the shirt ended in a kind of turn-down collar, which, however, was not stiffened or starched. The shirt was also closed at the neck with white ribbons, and particular care was taken in tying these bows, as well as a certain luxury in choosing the fabric for these tie-like ribbons. Even older gentlemen from distinguished families often showed a subtle coquetry when tying
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[188]" id="pgepubid00194"><a id="Seite_188" title="[188]"/></span>
these bows. Only later did wide, black neckerchiefs appear. But in families that valued tradition, these ties were frowned upon, and the fact that they were called “goyish” already indicates the strong sensitivity with which even such small and actually quite harmless deviations from the usual attire were received.</p>
    <p>The breeches reached only to the knee and were likewise tied at the bottom with ribbons. The stockings were white and quite long. Low leather shoes, which, however, had no heels, covered the feet. The place of the coat was taken by the long *chalat* — which consisted of precious woolen fabrics. The lower class wore clothes made of demi-cotton on weekdays, and *Rissel* — a cheap woolen fabric — on holidays, while the poor dressed in *Nanking*, a cotton fabric with narrow, dark blue stripes, in summer, and in gray, thick cloth in winter. This *chalat* was very long and reached almost to the ground. However, the outfit would have been incomplete if a belt had not been wrapped around the hips. Special care was given to this belt; it was considered to fulfill a religious commandment. It was intended to clearly separate the pure upper body from the lower body, which performed more impure functions. Especially on the Sabbath and holidays, a particular luxury was indulged in with the belt. Even men of low standing used to choose a silk belt for the consecration of the festivals.</p>
    <p>The head covering of the poor on weekdays was a cap that had flaps on both sides, which were usually
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[189]" id="pgepubid00195"><a id="Seite_189" title="[189]"/></span>
turned up, but could be pulled down over the ears in winter. These caps had triangular fur patches on the forehead area as well as on the sides. This cap was called a “Lappenmütze” (flap cap). I do not know where this name comes from; perhaps the ear flaps gave it this designation, or perhaps its resemblance to the head covering of the Lapps also gave rise to this name. Under this cap, every Jew, whatever his status or profession, wore a velvet skullcap, which actually never left his head, as it was considered almost a serious transgression, *b’kalos rosh*, to go about with an uncovered head. Of course, this skullcap was not removed from the head even when visiting neighbors.</p>
    <p>Summer and winter, the wealthy wore a sable cap called a “shtreimel.” It was tall, tapered to a point, and was a velvet cap adorned, if not always with sable, then with expensive fur strips. From beneath these caps, the *peyos* (sidelocks) peeked out, broad strands of hair that curled almost down to the chin. Curled *peyos* were considered particularly beautiful, and it was a noble ambition, not only for those fortunate enough to have curly hair but also for those with straight hair, to possess charmingly coiled *peyos*. The *peyos* were directly a requisite for the thinking person. A serious discussion was not even possible without the men twirling their *peyos* with their index finger. And especially when studying the Talmud, this play was an almost automatic occupation. One, as it were, drew the best thoughts from the *peyos*. And I have often had the feeling that Talmud study has lost its intensity, its logical sharpness, because
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[190]" id="pgepubid00196"><a id="Seite_190" title="[190]"/></span>
the *peyos* are no longer — at hand — for the pondering scholar.</p>
    <p>There were people who, with particular pleasure, let their *peyos* grow as long as possible, reaching down to their shoulders. In our town, there was a great scholar, an *Illui*, who wore *tefillin shel rosh* all day, though covered by the long *peyos* brushed over them. Similarly, Reb Yankev Meyer from Minsk also wears his *peyos* over his *tefillin shel rosh*, this pious man who is revered almost like a saint and whose conversations never end without him admonishing: “Children, give money for poor people.”</p>
    <p>The long silk coat, the belt, the fur cap, and the famous *peyos* now had to be removed. The men found it hard to accept their fate. They might have borne it more easily if they had at least been allowed to keep their sidelocks. Only these — in the perception of that time — gave the Jews their G-d-likeness. Now the *tzelem Elokim* (image of G-d) was taken from the Jewish people.</p>
    <p>A fashionable attire now replaced the old traditional dress. Men had to wear a black coat that, however, was only allowed to reach their knees. Long trousers, which fell over the boots, replaced the short breeches. In summer, men had to wear a hat, and in winter, a cap. It was clumsily made of black cloth and had a visor in front. It was called a *kartuz*. The strict orders of the Russian government, of course, only applied to street clothes. The clothing regulations did not penetrate into the home. And one will readily understand that very, very many Jews did not let themselves be prevented from wearing the clothes they alone liked at home — the old traditional dress. Even
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[191]" id="pgepubid00197"><a id="Seite_191" title="[191]"/></span>
when it was dark, Jews were often seen walking around as they once did.</p>
    <p>Against this, it seems, no objections were raised by the Russian authorities. With the miserable lighting that the relatively small towns had in the evenings and at night in those times, the traditional attire could not stand out anyway. That exceptions to the general regulations were possible is not at all surprising given the administrative techniques of the time; one could, after all, purchase the right to retain the old traditional dress for a period of two years by paying a certain fee!</p>
    <p>The clothing of women underwent equally profound changes as the men’s attire. And one can certainly assert, without falling into the reproach of being a eulogist of old times, that the exchange was not exactly a favorable one. The traditional dress of Jewish women in Lithuanian Russia had, until then, exhibited an oriental character in many details. It was colorful and, among the wealthy, very precious; quite large sums were spent on valuable fabrics and artistic jewelry. The very long shirt was high-necked and made of the finest linen. Petticoats and breeches were unknown even to women of the most distinguished families. The long stockings of today’s fashion were not customary then. They reached only up to the knee. Their color was always white, and openwork stockings were popular among ladies of wealthier families. — Elastic band was not yet in use at that time. And so, stockings were held up by wide satin ribbons, which were often attached to garter belts embroidered with cross-stitches. Knitted and crocheted garters were also fastened at the front with such bows. Mechanical
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[192]" id="pgepubid00198"><a id="Seite_192" title="[192]"/></span>
fasteners made of bronzed sheet metal or other metal were not available to ladies from the then still barely developed small ironware industry. — The shoes bore a great resemblance to sandals. They were very low and had no heels. They were held on the foot by narrow, black ribbons, which were crisscrossed and often led up to the calves. These shoes were made of black woolen fabric or morocco leather and were worn in all seasons. No one at that time had any idea of high boots or galoshes. However much the footwear of olden times differed in every detail from the styles seen in use over the next eighty years, they still had a fundamental consistency. Female nature could not deny itself even then, and, in keeping with the character of that attire, which particularly emphasized vanity with its gold jewelry, sandals were chosen very small and very tight, and some women had a somewhat mincing gait.</p>
    <p>Over the shirt, women wore a silk bodice. Pink and red were particularly popular colors for this. The bodice was fastened at the front. A wide silk ribbon was threaded through large silver eyelets with the help of a silver needle, often up to 8 cm long, into which the ribbon ended.</p>
    <p>The upper bodice was very short. Three rolls, made of cotton wool covered with stiff calico, were sewn to its lower edge. The skirt rested on these rolls. “Rested” is actually the wrong word: it was rather prone to a mischievous restlessness and had a natural tendency to slide off these rolls. And just as women in today’s fashion are often forced to fidget with their blouses,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[193]" id="pgepubid00199"><a id="Seite_193" title="[193]"/></span>
so the Jewish women of that time struggled to pull the skirt onto the rolls. And it was not uncommon for the afflicted to rub their fingers raw from the continuous readjustment of the skirt. The sleeves were very tight and so long that they often reached the fingers. The entire upper bodice was edged all around with fur, and it was natural that a particular luxury was indulged in with this fur. Distinguished women always chose sable. The neckline was finished with a stand-up collar, which was never to be omitted, even in summer.</p>
    <p>This upper bodice had approximately the shape of today’s Figaro or Bolero jackets. It was open at the front, so that the bodice was visible as far as it was not covered by the breast cloth. The fabric used for this upper bodice was *Karpo-Voluska* (carp scales). This name was entirely appropriate. There were silver, matte-gilded scales fastened so closely together that the woolen fabric was almost no longer visible. Today, such fabrics are actually only seen on masquerade costumes.</p>
    <p>Very special care was given to the breast cloth. Silver and gold embroidered fabrics with a truly oriental design were chosen for it. Crescents were actually the most popular.</p>
    <p>The upper part was covered with white lace, which was sourced from France. These laces were mostly made of flock and cordon silk and displayed extraordinarily artistic patterns.</p>
    <p>The skirt had a very distinctive cut. It was extraordinarily tight, barely a step wide, and, of course, always ankle-length. The most preferred fabric for this skirt was
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[194]" id="pgepubid00200"><a id="Seite_194" title="[194]"/></span>
satin. At intervals of about two finger-widths, longitudinal stripes of the finest gold-embroidered fabrics ran down the skirt. I still remember my mother’s dress very clearly. The patterns of this trim were stacked ellipses enclosing a delicate leaf. Only the front parts of the skirt were not adorned with these precious gold trims, as far as they were covered by the apron. The apron was an absolute requirement for a complete costume. It was also worn on the street and, naturally, at all festivities. It was long and reached the hem of the skirt. Wealthy women used colorful silk fabric or a white, precious batiste, embroidered with velvet flowers and artistically fine patterns and gold threads. (The poorer ones contented themselves with woolen fabrics or colored calicoes.) The fabric of the skirt, with its alternation between embroidered longitudinal stripes and satin stripes, was generally called “Güldengestick” (gold embroidery) in Lithuania.</p>
    <p>Over this outfit, a type of coat called a *Katinka* was worn. The sleeves of this garment had a wide bell shape. They were puffy at the top and narrow at the bottom. This *Katinka* was very long and had completely smooth widths at the front. The back was fitted at the waist. Satin was mostly used as the fabric, and since the *Katinka* was usually a garment for the colder season, it was padded and lined with woolen fabric. Wealthier ladies had them lined with satin. And I still remember that my mother, who placed particular importance on careful dressing, wore a *Katinka* lined with blue satin.</p>
    <p>This coat, however, was rarely worn like an overcoat
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[195]" id="pgepubid00201"><a id="Seite_195" title="[195]"/></span>
. Probably because it concealed the particularly precious outfit and did not show it off. Thus, it was customary to simply throw the coat over the shoulders, so that the sleeves hung down the back. Some women, especially the *gabbetes*, these helpers of the poor, used to put on only one sleeve, letting the other fall over the shoulder. Today, we would describe this as quite casual and unworthy of a distinguished lady. At that time, however, it was considered appropriate for one’s status. Thus, times change, and so does taste.</p>
    <p>By far the greatest attention was paid by rich and poor alike to headwear. Among the wealthy, it even represented one of the most significant assets. This headwear consisted of a black velvet band that looked very similar to the *kokoshnik* of Russian women. The edge was jagged in grotesque shapes and richly set with large pearls and brilliant stones. This headwear was worn above the forehead. The back of the head was covered by a smoothly fitting cap called a *kopke*. In the middle of this *kopke*, a bow of tulle ribbon and flowers was attached. A lace ruffle extended across the nape of the neck from one ear to the other, with small brilliant earrings attached near the eyes, at the temples. Of course, earrings were also not missing, and it was customary for distinguished women to wear very large brilliant diamonds in their ears. The pretty women looked extraordinarily advantageous in this jewelry, but one must also confess that the — let’s say: less pretty ones appeared quite adorned by the headwear. This precious band formed a main component of a woman’s outfit. And one could never see a woman without this adornment.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[196]" id="pgepubid00202">
        <a id="Seite_196" title="[196]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>Around the neck, chains of large pearls were worn, which often had a wondrous, silvery-gray shimmer. That the fingers were adorned with brilliant rings goes without saying after all this. Indeed, one can say that often there was almost too much of the good and beautiful: the fingers completely disappeared under the glittering, artfully crafted jewelry.</p>
    <p>One might perhaps wonder about this display of gemstones, pearls, and precious metals and describe the Jewish woman of that time as tastelessly vain and unbearably fond of adornment. Certainly, they knew how to dress and adorn themselves. But the lavishness was, in a way, necessitated by business reasons. Since the uncertain situation of that time, this nagging feeling of insecurity, and furthermore the precarious legal conditions almost precluded the ownership of real estate, a large part of movable capital was invested in easily transportable valuables. The creditworthiness of the husband was assessed based on the wealth of jewelry the wife wore.</p>
    <p>Festive occasions provided the opportunity to display all this wealth: the High Holy Days and weddings. On Lag Ba’omer, the 33rd day of the Sefirah period between Pesach and Shavuot, when the strict mourning of the Sefirah period could be interrupted and when a larger number of summer wedding celebrations were always held, one could truly admire all the splendor. And one might perhaps say that the women carried all the easily transportable wealth of the house with them. I emphasize: the women, for among men, any jewelry was strongly frowned upon, as it was not even customary then for men to wear wedding rings.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[197]" id="pgepubid00203">
        <a id="Seite_197" title="[197]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The headwear of young women (“veil”) was, of course, considerably more modest, but also quite colorful and almost adventurous: a yellow, green, or red cap made of woolen fabric or calico covered with a tulle or muslin veil, which was tied in a bow at the nape of the neck, its ends hanging long. These ends were called *Foches*. Many old women wore large red woolen cloths wrapped around their heads like a turban. This turban-like cloth was called *Knup*.</p>
    <p>The ear ruffle was never missing from the “veil.” Exactly in the middle above the forehead, a silk ribbon folded into a point was fastened with pins. On the crown of the head, tulle lace in the shape of a small basket was pinned, which was called a *Koischel*. Even among the poor, neither a hair-colored band at the forehead line nor the two rings placed near the eyes were missing.</p>
    <p>The headwear of girls differed only insignificantly from women’s attire, except that girls still enjoyed their beautiful hair ornaments. They also wore a kind of band made of narrow, red woolen fabric with a bow of the same material, which was called a *Tezub*. The cut of the dresses and aprons was the same as for women. They also wore the low sandals. But the bib and the neckline lace, the so-called *Kreindel*, did not adorn them. For wealthy girls, the head band was made of black silk tulle, into which beautiful buds were embroidered with red, blue, or rose-colored silk. In form, the bands of the rich and poor did not differ. The simple ones were called “Greischel,” the silk tulle bands “Vilna Knipel.”</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[198]" id="pgepubid00204">
        <a id="Seite_198" title="[198]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The poor women clung to their traditional attire with extraordinary love, and even in the greatest distress, they imposed restraint on all other needs, but their clothing was never changed. I had the opportunity to observe this tenacity during a year of famine. Many people came to our house to get bread there. At that time, charitable donations were distributed in a very discreet manner. My good mother had 5-6 pound loaves of bread baked daily, which were placed in a hallway cupboard, whose door was intentionally left open, for the poor people. Likewise, the buffet door in our dining room was always open then, so that one or another of our visitors, who had become impoverished during the difficult time, could partake of the treasures stored there: bread, butter, schnapps, cheese. We children were strictly forbidden to check who was coming. But who can completely suppress childish curiosity? From our safe hiding places, we saw the people come, whose posture, demeanor, and appearance had been changed by bitter hardship in many ways, but not their traditional dress…..</p>
    <p>What often tragicomic scenes unfolded back then! Even in memory, a laugh comes to me, but it is mixed with deep sorrow, indignation, and rage over the degradation of humanity.</p>
    <p>So, on a Friday morning in the summer of 1845, the following occurred: I was in the marketplace of the city of Brest, where many Jewish women had gathered to shop for the upcoming Sabbath, when suddenly a great commotion arose. Everyone ran in confusion, yet streamed towards one and the same point. Naturally, I hurried to get there as well, to learn the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[199]" id="pgepubid00205"><a id="Seite_199" title="[199]"/></span>
cause of the uproar. From the crowd, one heard laughter, then sighs. Finally, I reached the scene, and an outrageous sight presented itself to me. I saw a Jewish woman with (in the literal sense of the word) an uncovered head, as her hair, according to the Talmudic prescription for married women, had been shaved off. This unfortunate victim stood there, surrounded by the crowd, completely horrified, on the one hand because of the sin of being bareheaded in the open air (which, according to Jewish belief, was a great transgression), and on the other hand full of shame before the gaping people, and pleaded for mercy with a voice choked with tears to the policeman standing next to her, who had torn off her headwear with not-too-gentle a hand and was now holding it high as a trophy and shaking it, which incited the public to incessant laughter. The pitiable woman tried to cover her bald head with the corner of her apron with one hand, while her second hand rummaged in her pocket to retrieve the cap stored there, according to the new Russian regulation. Meanwhile, the unfortunate woman cried out incessantly in the most pathetic tone: “Panotzik, Panotzik! Here, I have it, the rag is in my pocket!” She finally placed the cap on her bare head, which disfigured her terribly. Only then did the henchman calm down and leave.</p>
    <p>Soon, fate brought him a second victim. This time it was a poor Jew who came to the marketplace in a long-skirted caftan. The policeman greeted him with not very flattering expressions. Calling over a second policeman, he ordered the Jew, trembling with fear, to stand still, grabbed a large pair of scissors that he always
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[200]" id="pgepubid00206"><a id="Seite_200" title="[200]"/></span>
carried with him, and then, assisted by his second colleague, he cut off the long skirts of the Jew’s caftan in the manner of a tailcoat, thereby revealing the (under) trousers. Then he tore off the unfortunate man’s headwear and cut his *peyos* so close to the ear that the poor man cried out in pain. After that, he released his victim, and the market crowd escorted the thus-treated Jew with loud jeers.</p>
    <p>Such executions also occurred on the main road. If a policeman encountered a Jew in traditional attire there and happened not to have scissors with him, he was of the opinion that this circumstance should not prevent him from performing his duty. Instead of scissors, he used two stones, specifically by laying the Jew sideways on the ground, stretching the peyot over one stone that lay close to the cheek, and rubbing the peyot with a second stone until they were worn through. The poor Jew naturally suffered terrible agony.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">These events sound unbelievable today. But these external sufferings and tragedies were, in a small way, only a reflection of the great upheavals that were preparing themselves.</p>
  </body>
</html>
