<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="de">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <title>
      The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoiren einer Grossmutter, Band II, by Pauline Wengeroff.
    </title>
    <link href="5858602757301170732_cover.jpg" rel="icon" type="image/x-cover" id="id-7644795048969180271"/>
    <link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.8 by Project Gutenberg"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">:|: Who goes into shul arayn?:|:<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Our holy Yidelach.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[85]">
          <a id="Seite_85" title="[85]"/>
        </span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">:|: Who goes into Schenk arayn?:|:<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Our Kotzker Chassidimlach.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">:|: La, la, la, la, la, la:|:<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">:|: Our Kotzker Chassidimlach.:|:<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>The Wengeroffs were also Chassidim, but Lithuanian.
I, the daughter of the Misnagid, saw and heard many
new things here and gradually had to get used to many foreign customs.</p>
    <p>My in-laws were very hospitable, and
many people frequented their house. This social interaction was
however quite different from that of my own family in Brest.
Since there were no prominent Jewish families in Konotop,
social interaction with non-Jews gradually developed,
which soon became quite friendly and lively.
Young officers, landowners with their wives and siblings
often and gladly visited my in-laws. Some
future Russian celebrities were also among them, such as: Dragomirov,
the later Governor-General of Kiev and teacher
of Alexander III, Ponamarev, Mescenzov, and others,
who later became known as writers or in the military field.
Through this interaction, “Christian” customs imperceptibly crept
into the in-laws’ house. A mixture of genuine Jewish religiosity
and non-Jewish customs arose.</p>
    <p>Gradually, I began to get used to the new life and
became firmly and intimately attached to my in-laws
and my husband’s siblings. They all endeavored
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[86]" id="pgepubid00091"><a id="Seite_86" title="[86]"/></span>
to help me overcome the pain of separation from my
family, to replace my own parental home.
I was like a daughter in the house. I also took on some
work in the household. For example, pouring tea
in the morning and evening, which lasted two hours each,
soon became my duty. Fulfilling this duty was strenuous
in midsummer during the great heat.
After completing the work, I was dripping wet. Here, by the
bubbling samovar, it was where my father-in-law, otherwise
a silent and somewhat grumpy man, had the
most affectionate conversations with me and always inquired
about my health.</p>
    <p>Two people in the house were most active: the
father-in-law and the grandmother. Despite her advanced
age, the old woman managed a large household. She
was the model of a hostess and was excellent at
baking and cooking. From the simplest black bread to
the most delicious delicacies, she knew how to prepare everything.
She was a special artist in preserving the
most varied fruits, managing to preserve their natural appearance.
Her “Knischi” were very popular,
patties that she used to fill with goose fat, cracklings, goose liver,
and also with sauerkraut steamed in goose fat.
Her masterpiece in this field, however, was her
honey lekachs (gingerbread). She boiled white honey
and poured it, along with some finely sifted ginger, into rye flour,
mixed everything well with a wooden spoon
and let the mixture cool a little. Then she took
some of the dough, into which good large hazelnuts
were kneaded, between both hands and rubbed, pulled,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[87]" id="pgepubid00092"><a id="Seite_87" title="[87]"/></span>
and pressed it until it became completely soft and
easily detached from her palms. This was done with the
entire dough, which was then baked in a tin casserole
in the oven.</p>
    <p>Besides her cooking, she had much else to do. For
people came to her all day long to seek advice and
support. She was also diligent in midwifery and
always stood by the poor in this regard. Almost daily,
the old woman was seen returning from the synagogue
surrounded by a crowd of people. One wanted her advice
about a position. Another about his daughter’s marriage. A third
complained to her about chest pains. A woman asked
her to come quickly to her daughter-in-law, who
was in labor, etc. Most of them she dispatched
on the way with good, sensible words. The others,
whose need was greater, accompanied her home.
At home, she first looked around the household,
ate a small bite, and then went to the office to
inform herself about various business matters.
She returned hastily, threw on her coat, and rushed
to the woman in confinement.</p>
    <p>She provided medical help to Jews and Christians alike.
She had a large number of recipes
and healing methods, some of which I still remember.
For chest pains and severe coughs, she prescribed the following
drink for a whole month: oatmeal,
cream, butter, and four lots of candied sugar had to
be boiled together well. This extraordinarily
nutritious drink strengthened people very quickly and the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[88]" id="pgepubid00093"><a id="Seite_88" title="[88]"/></span>
cough subsided. For aftercare, the patient had to take sweet
cream, which was shaken in a bottle until
small crumbs of butter appeared on the surface.
If this cure was carried out conscientiously, it
was usually successful. — For rheumatism, blood stagnation,
and headaches, she had people drink a large goblet
of a decoction of sarsaparilla for four to six weeks.
For hot flashes to the head and dizzy spells, her sovereign
remedy was bloodletting, whereby a
plate full of blood was drawn. For foot ailments,
she had baths made from boiled green poplar leaves.
Very often she also recommended baths from a decoction
of dry, crushed hay. She preferred
those crushed hay crumbs that are found on the floor
in the barn where hay has been stored for a long time.
These baths, by the way, were also considered by her to be an excellent
remedy for sick and weak children. As a general derivative
for the most varied complaints, she liked plasters of
Spanish flies. These were left on the affected area
until a blister formed, which she then opened with
scissors and kept open for a longer time with Buchner’s ointment
— a kind of drawing salve spread on linen.
For scrofulous children, she recommended making baths
from malt or bark of young oak trees. She gave mustard plasters
to two- and three-year-old children for stomach pains. A very
drastic remedy she used for sore throats and tonsillitis
in small children. She dipped her index finger
in hot water and massaged the glands from
the mouth. The children naturally made a lot of
noise; and I still see the old woman trying to calm
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[89]"><a id="Seite_89" title="[89]"/></span>
the children by clicking and smacking her lips.
But if all her methods failed, she resorted
to a heroic remedy. I myself had the opportunity
to observe this procedure with my child. After
the death of my firstborn child, I gave birth to a girl
who, in her first year — she was still breastfed — suddenly
began to sicken. She became paler and paler, weaker and weaker,
and wasted away completely. The old woman
had already tried all her remedies. But none helped. The
little child languished more and more. With solemn
earnestness, she told me: she would try one more remedy,
but it was a terrible remedy, and it was
not impossible that the child might perish under certain circumstances.
The child seemed lost to us anyway.
And so we decided to risk this last
decisive attempt. An ox was slaughtered
in the yard. Before the hide was removed, the belly was
cut open and the steaming stomach was taken out.
It was placed in a manger and covered with a woolen
cloth to keep it warm. It was then brought into the
sickroom. The old woman then cut open the stomach
with a large kitchen knife, pushed aside the steaming
chyme, and then placed the half-dead child
right in the middle. With one hand she held the little head
firmly, with the other she repeatedly covered the little body
of the sick child with the steaming stomach contents.
After only a few minutes, the pale child’s cheeks
reddened again. The otherwise half-closed eyes
opened and with a weak voice, it called me: —
“Mama, Mama.” Then the old woman took the child out of the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[90]"><a id="Seite_90" title="[90]"/></span>
ox stomach, bathed it, and put it in the cradle. After
a half-hour, peaceful sleep, it asked to eat.
From that hour on, from which it developed stronger
and stronger, it ate with the best appetite, and I
can assure you that this appetite has not left my
daughter — she is now 55 years old — even today.</p>
    <p>One can say of the grandmother, as of a sought-after
doctor, that she had a large practice. Naturally, she
had no rest at night either. Her room, which contained
a cabinet with medicines, had a side window,
at which one could knock at any hour of the night
if her presence was indispensable for a woman in labor.
One only had to knock very softly and call the name
“Beileniu,” and the old woman immediately awoke.
In ten minutes she was ready to go out. Her clothing
was adapted to the circumstances. She wore large, warm
boots, a warm dress, a black, warm satin hood on her head,
and a long fur coat. Quickly she took some medicines
and drove off. Sometimes the poverty of the people she
came to was so great that even diapers for the newborn
were missing; then the philanthropic woman did not hesitate
long. She tore her own shirt in half and wrapped the child
in it. She herself lit the fire in the oven,
boiled tea, bathed the child, covered the sick woman with
her warm coat, and did not leave her side until the
pains had completely subsided. From such journeys, she
returned in good spirits and often and gladly told of her
experiences.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[91]" id="pgepubid00094">
        <a id="Seite_91" title="[91]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>According to the custom prevailing among the Jews of this place,
the midwife was always presented with a white shirt after providing
midwifery assistance. My great-mother-in-law
possessed many such shirts, the acceptance of which she never refused
out of delicacy. They were kept in a
chest of drawers. If a poor girl in the town became engaged,
or if the need was so great somewhere that even
laundry was missing, then the chest of drawers was opened and the
supply was brought out.</p>
    <p>When I now observe the Russian-Jewish girls,
who numerous and eager for knowledge fill university auditoriums
and clinics and pave the way for the equality of women
in society and science, the image of that matron
comes to my mind, who created a field of activity for herself
in her small, limited circle and exercised social empathy
in these noble forms. Thus, I see the development of Jewish women
as a long, unbroken chain, where link
is joined to link, and not as something accidental, sudden,
and new in Jewish life.</p>
    <p>It might seem somewhat vague to the reader that I
arrive at such general conclusions by building on a single example.
But the woman whose nature and life I have described
in such detail here was no exception,
no isolated phenomenon. Many such women lived among the Jews,
and one can speak of her as a type. — She was a wonderful woman. After
her nightly excursions, she often went to her day’s work
without resting, quickly managed the entire household,
and then dedicated the rest of the day to business.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[92]" id="pgepubid00095">
        <a id="Seite_92" title="[92]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>She usually got up at five in the morning, sang
many chapters from the Psalms with devotion, and then
had a cup of tea. At 7 AM, she discussed household
matters with the cook and then went to
the synagogue.</p>
    <p>Her personal needs were very modest. She
ate little and simply. For guests, however, a richly set
table always had to be prepared, which was customary in those times
in <em class="gesperrt">every</em> wealthy, distinguished Jewish home.</p>
    <p>The population, including the Christian one, of Konotop
revered her; all acquaintances and friends showed her the
greatest respect. Her wish was sacred to everyone.
Her word was considered law, especially by her husband
and us children.</p>
    <p>Despite possessing power, she never let anyone feel it.
Nothing of egoism or self-overestimation was in this woman,
no rigidity of convictions, only deep seriousness, religious modesty,
and unfeigned pious submission to the will
of God — these were the main characteristics of her being. —
Does it need special emphasis that this woman faithfully
kept the word she once gave to my dying mother-in-law?
She was a true mother to the three orphaned children,
an excellent educator, who, with her broad vision, encouraged
the children to study Talmud, as well as
the Russian language.</p>
    <p>Her husband, a thin little man with sparkling, good-natured
eyes, was completely devoted to her and submitted
to her will, because he knew that she was superior to him
in every respect. He was also active in business, it is true. But
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[93]" id="pgepubid00096"><a id="Seite_93" title="[93]"/></span>
his wife had the decisive word. He could
occasionally be strict with the grandchildren. But
no one feared him, because his gentle nature was known.
He was deeply moved by all human misery. Scenes
in the yard, which took place among servants, and
which no one else noticed, could deeply touch him. In
ordinary life, he was without initiative, lacking energy…
But when leading prayers in his own small synagogue, he became
a new man. His whole demeanor changed
the moment he spoke the first words of prayer.
A strength and a fire came into his voice that one
had to marvel at where this tiny body got it from.
The tone of his prayer became more and more agitated, more and more
internalized. He fell into an otherworldly ecstasy.
The small, stooped man became great, as great and sublime
as the words he spoke.</p>
    <p>He was personally very fond of me, and later, when
my firstborn was a few months old, the great-grandfather
came to his room every morning before dawn
and played with the child for an hour. The little one always
recognized him and stretched out his hands to him.
He took him from the cradle, lifted him high above his head,
and sang: “Haisurki, haisurki…”</p>
    <p>The child laughed loudly, wiggled happily in the air, and
reached with his hands for the old man’s face and beard.</p>
    <p>This scene repeated itself regularly every morning.
Half-slumbering, I sometimes listened to the play from my bedroom,
and I always felt so warm, so comfortable.</p>
    <p>A story, which was a secret in the family
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[94]" id="pgepubid00097"><a id="Seite_94" title="[94]"/></span>
and was told to me, is connected to this couple: Many years ago,
the husband was imprisoned due to a denunciation.
The deeply shaken wife did not shrink from any danger
to bring comfort and courage to her husband.
She visited him frequently in prison, disguised as a soldier
— an act that, had it been discovered,
would have brought her certain death.</p>
    <p>Even in this heroic act, she appears to me as a
forerunner of those Jewish women who, since the 1880s,
participated in the Russian Revolution and fearlessly
fought for the good cause. But at that time,
Russia was still deeply asleep, and for a
Jewish woman, there was then no other way
to reveal her heroic spirit than in the narrow, closed
family life. Within this circle, she
also fully fulfilled her mission.</p>
    <p>My great-mother-in-law carried her worries cheerfully
and remained healthy and vigorous into old age. When I
came to the Wengeroff house, she was still beautiful — a
figure of medium build, an oval face, intelligent, kind
eyes, a slightly curved nose, and a very small
mouth with dazzling white teeth, which, however, almost never
twisted into a laugh; a chin on which, strangely, a
beard grew, which she had to have removed every week.</p>
    <p>All her striving and effort were dedicated to her son,
my father-in-law. He was the center of her thoughts
and aspirations, her worries and wishes. She
did have another daughter. But she showed her little
interest. Her entire mother’s heart belonged to her
son, the bright star of her arduous life.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[95]" id="pgepubid00098">
        <a id="Seite_95" title="[95]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>I had little opportunity to get to know my father-in-law
better, because he often went on business trips;
and when he returned home, business also
completely occupied him. He was a clever man with great
Talmudic knowledge; tactful towards everyone and
the most amiable gentleman and patient husband towards his wife.
His wife, an intelligent but also domineering spouse,
was convinced of her omniscience. The general respect
from all household members and the boundless adoration
of her husband further supported her self-confidence.
She possessed knowledge of Hebrew, which further increased her pride,
especially since education among women was a rarity
not only in Konotop but in all of Little Russia at that time.</p>
    <p>She got up very late. When she appeared in the dining room,
either my older sister-in-law or I tried
to prepare her breakfast with all attention. At
that moment, her criticism already began. She criticized
all day, and all maids and servants
received their share immediately during breakfast. After
breakfast, she took a seat on a veranda, from where
she, like a princess, surveyed and controlled all her possessions.
And everyone in the house, male and female servants,
already trembled at her voice.</p>
    <p>Apart from a brother-in-law and his wife, my sister-in-law
Kunze, an unusually good and beautiful woman, the
other members of the house were very young siblings
of my husband, still children.</p>
    <p>That was the environment in which I lived my new life.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[96]" id="pgepubid00099"><a id="Seite_96" title="[96]"/></span>
It was a distinguished Jewish house. Here I had
the opportunity to continue to practice and develop
everything I had learned in my parents’ home: hospitality,
care for the poor, study, fear of God, and reverence
for parents — virtues through which we Jews hope
to attain salvation and which were cultivated here with great zeal.
I felt special respect and reverence for my in-laws
because they took in orphans and children of poor relatives,
raised them appropriately, married them off,
and established businesses for them.</p>
    <p>The Sabbath was also kept holy here. But
it was not adorned with the same solemnity as in our
parents’ home. Friday evening seemed quite sober to me
in my in-laws’ house. It disturbed my devotion that
business was discussed at the table. My father-in-law
talked with his father about newly bought
horses, their good and bad qualities, and their
diseases. The young people — my husband was no different —
often fell asleep at the table out of boredom,
until my mother-in-law woke them up laughing and teasingly
for the table prayer… No one here thought of Zemirot,
the holy Sabbath songs. The Sabbath custom was indeed
fulfilled exactly as prescribed; but it was circumvented,
if profit demanded it, in a clever way. If
a business letter arrived on the Sabbath, the Shabbos goy
opened it, and it was then calmly read.</p>
    <p>How different it was in my parents’ home! The
Sabbath was truly holy, and my father resembled a venerable
Rabbi on that day! Nothing in him betrayed the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[97]" id="pgepubid00100"><a id="Seite_97" title="[97]"/></span>
businessman, and neither on Friday evening nor throughout
the entire Sabbath was a single word spoken about business
matters; even letters that arrived on that day
were set aside and only opened in the evening. In
the Wengeroff house, things were more sober. The quiet, transfigured,
pious enthusiasm that prevailed on holidays in my
parents’ home was completely absent here. Otherwise, the way
the house was furnished always reminded me of my parental home:
also large rooms, valuable furniture, beautiful
silverware, carriages, horses, servants, frequent
guests…</p>
    <p>I read a lot in Konotop, mainly Russian.
The German books, such as Schiller, Zschokke, Kotzebue,
Bulwer, which I had brought from Brest, had all
been read already, — and now it was the turn of the Russian books
that the Wengeroff library contained.
I read the journals “Moskovskiye Vedomosti” (Moscow News),
“Severnaya Pchela” (The Northern Bee), etc., and taught
my husband, who was extremely eager to learn, German.
His main study, however, he dedicated to the Talmud;
every Monday and Thursday he spent the night with his Rebbe,
bent over large folios. They only left
the study room at daybreak.</p>
    <p>Often he sat there with his Melamed, for hours
on a low stool, wrapped from head to toe in a
large rag, “Plachte,” his head covered with ashes,
and performed “Goles abrichten,” i.e., lamenting the yoke of
exile. An old custom that perhaps one in thousands
of Jews practices today.</p>
    <p>Since our engagement, a mystical-religious mood
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[98]" id="pgepubid00101"><a id="Seite_98" title="[98]"/></span>
had increasingly filled my husband. He delved into the
holy mysteries of the Kabbalah. This study gradually
awakened in the enthusiastic young man the fervent desire
to make a pilgrimage to Lubavitch, the seat of the head of the Lithuanian
Chassidim. There he had to receive an exhaustive answer
from the Rebbe to all agonizing questions and riddles.
There he wanted to confess his youthful sins
and ask for absolution.</p>
    <p>Barely two years ago, my husband had advocated
liberal ideas — which had even led to disputes with his parents.
Now, after such a short time, he fell into the
opposite and lost himself in mystical-ecstatic moods.</p>
    <p>One morning — it was Purim — while I was
working in the household, my husband came to me in the
kitchen and told me, beaming with joy and excitement,
that his father allowed him and his older brother to travel
to Lubavitch accompanied by their Rebbe. As a Misnagid’s daughter,
I did not understand the significance and seriousness of this
event. Doubtfully, I asked my husband if he was serious.
I received a short but meaningful “Yes” in reply.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Preparations were made. And soon a
carriage with three strong horses was ready for departure.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[99]" id="pgepubid00102">
        <a id="Seite_99" title="[99]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00103">
      <a id="Die_Wandlung">The Transformation.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>I don’t know what happened with the Rebbe,
for my husband never spoke of this sad experience;
I only know that a young man full of hope and enthusiasm
left his family and made a pilgrimage to the Rebbe, as
to a saint who alone possesses the power
to lift the veil from the great mysteries…
and that he returned disillusioned. The blue flower, which
he, like so many others, set out to find, he did not find
sun-kissed at the edge of a pure, refreshing
spring, but withered and unlike the image of his dreams.
Not despair, but a quiet sadness settled
over his being. The magic faded, and with it the
interest and fervor he had shown in the last year towards
religious customs and duties.
And then began the detachment from all that had previously
been dear and close, so close that it seemed to have
grown into the person and passed into his blood.
It did not appear suddenly, not all at once—
only gradually and softly, so softly that one barely
noticed it at first… My husband still performed his prayers.
Learning with the Rebbe also continued. Yes,
even the nightly sitting and working over the folios
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[100]" id="pgepubid00104"><a id="Seite_100" title="[100]"/></span>
did not cease… But the loving heart of a woman,
who knows how to listen and perceives the slightest stir,
cannot be deceived… This was no longer the lively
interest of the researcher and seeker, no longer the fervent,
ardent prayer that rises to ecstasy, in
which one feels close to God and speaks with Him
… No, it was a dead fulfillment of duty. Young and
inexperienced as my husband was, he did not understand how
to find the golden mean. From enthusiasm and religious
fervor to complete disillusionment was but one step for him.
He took it and entered the opposite path,
which many Jews had already trodden. My deeply religious
spirit immediately grasped this change. I felt
very heavy-hearted. Even then, I sensed all the struggles
that awaited me in the coming years.</p>
    <p>The fulfillment of religious duties without religious
conviction eventually became burdensome to my husband.
He gradually began to neglect them. His parents
soon noticed it. A tension arose between them
and their son. The first confrontation occurred when
my husband had his beard trimmed. His parents were
indignant about it and, on this occasion, leveled
serious accusations against him, also concerning the neglect of other
religious customs, which they had tacitly tolerated until then.</p>
    <p>At that time, the first conflict also arose between me
and my husband. I implored him not to give in to vanity
and to let his beard continue to grow. He
felt hurt, wanted to hear nothing of it, reminded me of
his rights as a man and demanded obedience and submission
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[101]" id="pgepubid00105"><a id="Seite_101" title="[101]"/></span>
to his will… That was a sharp stab
to my sensitive heart; the blue sky of my marital happiness
clouded over…</p>
    <p>During this time, I became a mother. The wish of my
parents and in-laws came true: God granted
me a son. He was the first grandson and great-grandson of the male
sex. The joy was great.</p>
    <p>It was a difficult hour, but love and
care helped me through it. In the ghetto, there were
very special means to ease childbirth for the woman in labor.
The first condition was that no one in the
house, except the midwife and the oldest woman, was allowed to know about the
impending birth. If, however, the impending
delivery was known, one was certain that
it would last long and could become dangerous. Nine times
the woman in labor was led around the dining table.
Then she had to walk back and forth three times over the threshold of her room.
All locks on the cupboards,
dressers, and doors, even the padlocks on the
pantry, were unlocked. All buttons on the
undergarments of the woman in labor were unbuttoned, all knots
were untied. Then, it was believed in the naive
symbolism of the people, the baby would also be delivered more
easily.</p>
    <p>The new mother was, of course, cared for with the utmost diligence.
On the first day, I received only gruel and
tea with toasted white bread. On the second day,
the specific new mother’s feasting began. Early in the
morning, tea with the best cream was served. After
two hours, it was time for that “Trianke,” that oat gruel,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[102]" id="pgepubid00106"><a id="Seite_102" title="[102]"/></span>
the preparation of which I spoke about particularly in the
treatment of breast ailments. The old woman always handed it
to me with the words: “This plate of soup, my child,
will strengthen and heal your intestines and your breast.”
— After another two hours, I had to eat a rich
chicken soup with some chicken. Soon after,
another “Trianke” followed. But this one was prepared differently.
It consisted of cooked honey that had stood open
in a warm place for a few days, and was poured over with a
spirituous extract of spices, such as galangal, star anise, nutmeg,
cinnamon, cloves, figs, carob.
A glass of this nectar — and one slept
deliciously. Upon waking, one usually had a strong thirst,
which was vigorously combated with tea. Of course,
butter rusks were not missing. After another two hours, there was
plum compote with almond cake, and in the evening again
chicken soup with chicken. — This feasting lasted eight
days. In special cases, it was continued for up to four weeks.
It was a fixed belief among the
old women: as long as a fairly large pot was not filled with
chicken bones, i.e., as long as the new mother
had not consumed a certain number of chickens,
she was still to be considered a new mother.</p>
    <p>According to general custom, during the first
week of my son’s life, every evening more than ten
boys came to my room with the “Behelfer” (assistant teacher)
to recite the first “Parshe” (part) of the Krias Shema (evening prayer).
This was done, according to the belief of the
pious Jews, for the protection of the newborn from
evil forces. Each time after the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[103]" id="pgepubid00107"><a id="Seite_103" title="[103]"/></span>
prayer, the children received raisins, nuts, apples, and cake, and the “Behelfer”
received a monetary gift after the week.</p>
    <p>For the same purpose of protecting the newborn,
Kabbalistic prayers, called “Schemaus,”
were affixed to the wall above the new mother’s head,
a second sheet on the door, and a third
placed between the child’s pillows. On the last night
before the “Bris” (circumcision), the child was most
protected — it was called the “Wachnacht” (watch night). On the eve
of the ritual ceremony, the “Mohel” used to bring
the knife in a sheath and often a Kabbalistic
work, and the midwife placed both under
the newborn’s pillows. If the child then
sobbed, the midwife usually remarked meaningfully:
“He already knows what is coming.” But if he
smiled in his sleep, it was said that the “Malach” (good
angel) was playing with him.</p>
    <p>On the eve of my son’s circumcision, we gave
a meal to the poor, as was the custom among prominent Jews
before a Bris and a wedding. The day
before, the synagogue attendant “Shames” was sent to the
poor quarter and formally invited the poor — even the
street beggars were “invited to the Wachnacht.” In
a large room of the house where the hosts resided,
several rows of long tables were set up, at
which the guests took their places. First, the men
and then, separately, the women were served. The sequence of dishes
itself also became typical over time. And so,
at each place, there was a “Bulke” (white bread), next to it a
glass of brandy and a piece of “Lekach” (gingerbread); then
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[104]" id="pgepubid00108"><a id="Seite_104" title="[104]"/></span>
followed fish or herring, roast, and groats. Large
pitchers of beer stood on the tables. One drank as desired.
The host, hostess, and their children served the guests themselves.
Before a wedding, the bride and
groom also came to the poor and received the usual congratulations
— “Mazel Tov” —. The poor usually
behaved with decorum. The meal proceeded according to
all religious prescriptions. First, hands were washed.
Then the prayer was spoken. At the end,
“M’sumon gebenscht” was said — there were more than
three people present, at our table even more than two hundred.
After the grace, the men departed with blessings and
words of thanks. Then it was the women’s turn. Before
leaving, each poor person received alms.</p>
    <p>For our family celebration, we had dear guests
from out of town: my great-mother-in-law’s father, <em class="gesperrt">Reb
Abraham Selig Selensky</em>, and his wife from Poltava.
He was a wise, distinguished, religious, very old man,
the old <em class="gesperrt">Selensky</em>, who enjoyed great popularity
in Poltava. He was still one of the old school,
whom business zeal did not prevent from diligently
studying the Talmud and strictly performing religious duties.
His four sons had already received European
education, but they had managed to grasp the new
and process it within themselves, while at the same time
not renouncing the old. The eldest among them was unusually
linguistically skilled, the second a court painter, the third a lawyer,
and the youngest a famous Talmudist. This
Talmudist was so pious that he could not bring himself
to have his long beard trimmed.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[105]" id="pgepubid00109"><a id="Seite_105" title="[105]"/></span>
He always wore it half-hidden in a necktie so as not
to be laughed at.</p>
    <p>But I wanted to talk about the Bris. Early
in the morning, the midwife made her preparations for the
bath. For bathing before the circumcision is a very
special, solemn ceremony. The child is bathed very early.
The water must not be very warm,
because the child was not allowed to get overheated. Otherwise,
according to the prevailing view at the time, bleeding
would occur after the operation. A large
number of old women were always present during the bath.
It was considered a meritorious act to pour two handfuls of water
over the child. During this procedure, the women let a
silver coin slide into the water. It was intended for the midwife.</p>
    <p>In the room where the circumcision takes place,
two large candles in tall candlesticks are lit early at 10 AM.
On a special table, the Bris utensils are prepared.
A bottle of wine, a cup that must hold at least the content
of one and a half eggshells, a plate full of sand, a
box with powder made of old rotten wood.
Around 10 AM, the first guests already arrive. The
Mohel orders that the child should now be swaddled.
In wealthy homes, the finest linen was used for these diapers.
The child receives a small cap on its head, is placed
in a silk baby wrap, and covered with
a blanket of equally fine silk. For
swaddling before the circumcision, a very specific
method was customary. A diaper was folded triangularly. The
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[106]" id="pgepubid00110"><a id="Seite_106" title="[106]"/></span>
child’s little hands were placed straight along its sides
and wrapped with one corner of the diaper each.
The fine, lace-trimmed shirt was folded up
over the child’s body in a wide hem.
Then the child was wrapped in a large diaper, around
which a very long and wide swaddling band was wrapped so tightly
that the child looked like a mummy.
Only the little feet remained free, so that the child would not get too
hot, because any strong overheating would pose the risk of
bleeding.</p>
    <p>Melancholy, I looked at my child, who was now to make the sacrifice
for his people. I pressed him to my
pounding heart. But soon the midwife took the
child from me and handed him to the oldest and most dignified woman
who stood beside the bed. She rocked him a few times in
her arms and then handed him to the next woman,
who also rocked him back and forth several times, before
passing him on. Thus the child travels from arm to arm,
until he is finally handed to the godmother. She steps
with the child to the threshold of the room where the
act is to take place. As soon as the festive assembly
catches sight of the child, the men call out to him a Boruch Habo
“Blessed be the one who comes.” The godfather (Quatter) then
takes the child and hands him to the Sandik (Syndic),
who, wrapped in a large Tallis, has taken a seat
in an armchair. His feet rest on a wooden stool.
Then the Mohel speaks a moving prayer.
He implores Elijah, the guardian angel of circumcision, the
miraculous protector of Jews in distress and danger, for
his assistance. And now follows the actual circumcision.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[107]" id="pgepubid00111"><a id="Seite_107" title="[107]"/></span>
A violent cry from the child. And while the Mohel
speaks the blessing over the wine and gives the child his
name, one still hears the child’s soft whimpering,
which sometimes only calms down when the Mohel
gives him a few drops of wine on his
lips with his little finger. It is often customary that for the individual
acts after the circumcision, during the blessing over the wine,
during the naming, and during the final prayer, a different
gentleman is honored with the privilege of holding the child.
— The ceremony ends with the godfather
handing the child back to the godmother. Beaming with happiness,
the mother then receives the child, and the little
fellow may now find his blissful rest at his mother’s breast again.
He is now admitted into the covenant of Israel
and is a descendant of the patriarch Abraham.
The guests remain together for a long time at a festive meal,
for this Seudah is considered a particularly holy meal.</p>
    <p>Once the circumcision is happily over — and I actually
never remember a sad incident —
then the power of evil spirits is broken. After three
days, my child’s wound was healed. This
happy healing was again celebrated with a feast.
And soon, maternal care could
devote itself entirely to the physical care of her child.</p>
    <p>It was quite natural that every mother breastfed her
child herself at that time. Before the mother offered the child her breast,
a few drops were always expressed to the side,
because excitement, grief, and worries could have poisoned the first drops.
The degeneration of the feeding bottle had not yet
penetrated the ghetto. If a mother
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[108]" id="pgepubid00112"><a id="Seite_108" title="[108]"/></span>
had too little nourishment, she put a pacifier
in the child’s mouth. She put white bread, or in case of need, black bread
with a piece of sugar, after thoroughly
chewing it, into a small cloth and tied it with a
thread. There were quite peculiar methods to calm crying
children. The child was bathed and, after
drying, placed on a large pillow by the mostly old and experienced
nurse. Then the body was thoroughly rubbed with Provence oil,
the left foot pressed together with the right hand over the child’s tummy
in such a way that elbow and knee came together.
The same maneuver was performed with the left
hand and the right foot. Then
the little legs were stretched and the arms placed firmly against the
body. Thus the child was lifted up
and rocked head down for a moment.
Then the child was placed on its stomach,
and its back and little feet were gently stroked.
Even if the child had cried with all its might, it became quiet.</p>
    <p>Even more drastic was the following method. If even
wild rocking of the cradle, which usually
floated freely between two ropes attached at the head and foot ends,
did not help, the nurse carried the child
into the kitchen, first rocked it in her hands, and
then lifted it for a few minutes over the stove into the
chimney, while muttering incomprehensible words. And
indeed: the child became quiet, provided that the
nurse had not forgotten beforehand to put pepper and salt into two
small sachets or, in an emergency, to pour them into her hand
and walk around the child with them several times.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[109]" id="pgepubid00113"><a id="Seite_109" title="[109]"/></span>
Sometimes this circling around the child alone was enough
to calm it. But it was certainly a remedy against
the evil eye, which was particularly to be feared when
strangers looked at a sleeping child. Another
“infallible remedy” was that the mother had to kneel
on one knee while the child was pushed back and forth
three times between her legs.</p>
    <p>Unfortunately, however, there were many children for whom the restlessness
was already the beginning of an illness. If a child did not
thrive, remained thin and weak, then the
old experienced women made the diagnosis: Rippküchen (rib-kitchens).
The child’s ribs began to wither. I believe that
must be a disease that is today called English disease (rickets).
These children naturally cried
a lot. And to counter the cause of this restlessness,
the wise women knew a powerful remedy.
They laid the child on the bed and took a rolling pin, around
which laundry used to be wrapped in those times,
placed this rolling pin on the child’s ribs, and struck
it nine times with a notched thick board, which was otherwise
used to roll over the wrapped rolling pin. That
was a harsh remedy, but it helped if one knew the right
incantation words. The evil spirits then
fled.</p>
    <p>However, there were children who did not become quiet
even after this procedure and even after the most solemnly spoken incantations.
The nurse then pondered.
But God helped her, and she found the correct diagnosis:
the child has hair on its back. Once this diagnosis
was made, therapy was quickly initiated. The child
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[110]" id="pgepubid00114"><a id="Seite_110" title="[110]"/></span>
was bathed, dried; and then balls of
freshly baked soft rye bread were firmly rubbed back and forth
on the child’s back, with some of the back hairs
sticking to the bread ball. Then she
continued to rub the child’s back only with her palm until
the small hairs stood firm like bristles. And
indeed, most children became quiet.</p>
    <p>For very miserable and emaciated children, the
following method was also applied: After lunch, the child was
wrapped in the tablecloth still covered with all the breadcrumbs,
then placed for a moment in a large, lockable suitcase.
The lid was quickly opened. This was done daily for four
weeks. In the tablecloth, the child was weighed
every week. If the child was to recover, it
gained weight every week. When the
first slender crescent of the moon became visible, the child
was held up to the moon so that it could see it.
To this, the following words were spoken: “Mjesjatz,
Mjesjatz wisokoss, dai tyello nassej kosst,” which means in German: “Moon,
Moon, grow, give flesh to these bones.”</p>
    <p>After 18, often already after 15 months, the child
was weaned. When the mother gave the child her breast for the last time,
she sat on the threshold and let the
child drink until it stopped by itself and
tiredly laid its head to the side. That was a difficult, but
nevertheless festive day. The child’s crude dependence
was thus resolved. But if the mother felt
much pain on this day, it was a day of jubilation when the
child stood on its little legs for the first time and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[111]" id="pgepubid00115"><a id="Seite_111" title="[111]"/></span>
walked. At this point, the mother then made a cut
in the floorboard, which meant: “cutting the Pente.”
The shackles were removed from the child’s little feet.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>Simultaneously with my son’s Bris, another
great religious ceremony took place. My still young
mother-in-law Cäcilie had commissioned a “Sefer
Torah” to be written for a year, for which she paid several hundred rubles.
She wanted to have the holy scroll consecrated in the synagogue to which it
was dedicated. This act of my
mother-in-law received great applause both in her house and in the town
and was highly credited to a woman. The
Sofer, i.e., the scribe of the Torah, a truly religious
Jew who spent his life in prayer and fasting and
was known as an honest man in Konotop, brought the
holy scroll to our house.</p>
    <p>The ceremony of the Torah dedication was celebrated like
a wedding; the “Chuppah” (canopy) was fetched and
set up in a large hall. The rabbi was given the honor
of first taking the Torah in his hands and
stepping with it under the Chuppah. Then they proceeded
to the synagogue — the rabbi in front, followed by
the most dignified and oldest of the city. Lastly, the women
and girls with burning candles in silver candlesticks.
Even the girls in this procession were not allowed to go with uncovered
heads. As the procession just began to move, the joyful music of a band
sounded. A lively march echoed through the streets. To
its sounds, the entire procession danced. Vigorously
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[112]" id="pgepubid00116"><a id="Seite_112" title="[112]"/></span>
the men danced, passionately clapping their hands.
Behind them, the women and girls skipped. All together
rejoiced, cheered, were happy, and honored the beautiful deed
of the pious woman.</p>
    <p>Thus the procession arrived at the synagogue. Since the ceremony
lasted until the eve, the large crowd
performed the Mincha prayer right there.</p>
    <p>The dedication of the Torah was one of the most solemn
acts. In a Jewish town, it was an event
that was not easily forgotten. I experienced it for the
first time. It made a great impression on me.
From a window, I watched the procession and greatly regretted
not being able to participate.</p>
    <p>After these festivities, our guests from
Poltava departed. Everyone resumed their duties. The
life in my in-laws’ house went its usual way.
I gradually recovered. My mother’s heart reveled in
new joys. I forgot the worries of recent times
as I looked at the little boy, that tiny little being,
who still slumbered so peacefully, heard nothing, saw nothing,
and knew nothing of the young mother who stood for hours
at his cradle, looked at him, smiled at him, and
dreamed of his future happiness and greatness. —
Months passed, and my dear sweet boy — he was
blond and had blue eyes, quite different from the
Wengeroff type — grew bigger and bigger; he thrived
into a strong, healthy child. With each day, my joy
in him grew… What new meaning my life
received! My love was now divided between my
husband and the child, and truly, neither was
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[113]" id="pgepubid00117"><a id="Seite_113" title="[113]"/></span>
shortchanged! Of course, the little one was the darling
of the whole house.</p>
    <p>Do I still need to say that our married life became even more tender,
our mutual attachment and faithful love even more
intense through this child?</p>
    <p>Time passed, and our son turned two years
old. His mental development far outpaced his physical
development. He was bright and clever for his age.
My husband and I were proud of our firstborn.
We forged great plans for his future.</p>
    <p>But God willed otherwise, and He took him to Himself, this our darling… Tired from the incessant vigil at his sickbed, I left my sick child’s bedside. In the adjoining room, I lay down exhausted on the sofa and sank into a deep sleep. I dreamed I was in the dining room; some light penetrated through the closed shutters; the room was in semi-darkness. Despite the closed shutters, I could perceive everything that was happening outside. A large black dog howled terribly, throwing its head far back, and behind it stood a number of musicians; they played violins covered with black cloth, holding them upside down. Astonished, I asked them why they were playing in this manner, and received the grim answer: “Today we must play like this”… I awoke in fear and terror and rushed into the sickroom. But they no longer allowed me to my child. — It was no longer mine! — Far, far from me, it ascended to the heavens and took my young, desperate mother’s heart with it forever.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[114]" id="pgepubid00118">
        <a id="Seite_114" title="[114]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>It was the first severe blow of fate that struck me, and only the two little children whom God granted me in the following years comforted me a little and eased my pain.</p>
    <p>Meanwhile, the conflict between my husband and his parents had escalated further. My husband no longer found joy in studying the Talmud together with the Rebbe. He brought the large folios (Gemores) to our apartment and studied independently. He liked it when I sat beside him with a book or needlework, and when he grew tired, we would then read together from a German work. However, this study of the Talmud completely lost its former religious character and became more of a philosophical pursuit for my husband, a critical examination and review, and no longer played the main role in his life. He now devoted himself more to earning a living and even undertook independent businesses with my dowry, but in doing so, he lost all the money. In commercial matters, I had no say with him; he called my advice interference and did not want to hear any of it. He was of the opinion that a woman, especially his own, possessed no talent in this direction and perceived my interference as a humiliation for himself. This opinion was widespread among most Jews in Little Russia at that time, especially among the concessionaires, who, in their arrogance, felt like autocrats and would tolerate no advisors.</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[115]" id="pgepubid00119"><a id="Seite_115" title="[115]"/></span>
we were supposed to spend were over; and now it was time to begin an independent life. My in-laws arranged a business for us, also a concession for brandy, and we had to move to another town.</p>
    <p>One morning, a large, comfortable carriage stood ready for travel in front of the house, and another wagon with provisions beside it. The hour of departure had come. Accompanied by blessings, we, my husband, I, two children, and two servants, boarded our carriage, and off we went into the world, towards new destinies.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Thus, after four years of living together, we left this house, where we had last lived the patriarchal Jewish family life; we left it forever.</p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00120">Further Destinies.</h2>
    <p>Luben was the name of the place where we intended to establish our independent existence. The Jewish population in this small town, belonging to Little Russia, was culturally more advanced than that in Konotop; especially in their external way of life, customs, and manners, they approached the European style more closely. The few Jews in Luben who still faithfully adhered to traditional Judaism played no role here. Life here was permeated with the customs and practices of the large majority of the Christian population. There were no Talmudists, no great Jewish scholars, not even a large synagogue. However, it was not an irreligiosity,</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[116]" id="pgepubid00121"><a id="Seite_116" title="[116]"/></span>
that enlightenment brings with it. It was simply a lack of tradition, ignorance, and an absorption into foreign ways.</p>
    <p>A small Jewish community existed in Luben, whose members were entirely uneducated and ignorant people who regarded us as the intellectual aristocracy.</p>
    <p>In Luben, we already found a small apartment that my in-laws had furnished according to our needs and demands. It wasn’t long before I found my way around my rather large household and managed it with expertise. My husband took over the business, for which, as it turned out, he possessed abilities.</p>
    <p>Now, consideration for his parents was no longer effective. My husband was free to shape his life according to his own will. Daily prayer in tallis and tefillin now ceased. But his interest in the Talmud still persisted. He enjoyed discussing at length with the town’s rabbi, who frequently visited our house as a guest; however, this interest, as I noted earlier, had taken on a purely scientific character.</p>
    <p>The famous Little Russian hospitality also prevailed in our house; we quickly became known and popular, and visits from relatives, friends, and acquaintances never ceased. Three times a day, the table was amply set for eight to ten people. There was almost never a meal without guests. Our household grew larger day by day. It became, of course, far too large for our circumstances. My in-laws severely reproached us for this extravagance.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[117]" id="pgepubid00122">
        <a id="Seite_117" title="[117]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>“A message has come from Kathy.” With these words, my husband entered my bedroom one Saturday morning and handed me a sheet of paper on which the following was written in pencil: “Sister, send me something to eat, my child and I are hungry and we have nothing with us.” My pity and my fright were boundless, and I overwhelmed my husband with questions. I learned that the messenger was waiting in the kitchen, hastily threw something on, and ran out to him. From the bearer of the letter, a young peasant, I learned that the Jewish carter with whom my sister had come had stopped on Friday evening in a village not far from Luben and, due to the Sabbath rest and damage to the wagon, had not wanted to continue driving, even though he himself, as well as his passengers, were thus forced to remain on the road without provisions until the evening of the next day. “This evening,” the young peasant added, “she can already be here.”</p>
    <p>I didn’t think much, ran into the dining room, and packed a napkin full of good, tasty foods: a Sabbath bread, cold boiled chicken, butter, cheese, some liqueur, and almond cake, which my sister, as she later told me, immediately reminded her of our childhood days, of home. This package was to be quickly delivered to my sister by the peasant, who received a silver ruble for his trouble.</p>
    <p>After the messenger had been dispatched, I dressed, arranged what was necessary in the household, all the while a nervous, joyful impatience would not leave me. I would have loved to have the carriage hitched up to drive to meet my</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[118]" id="pgepubid00123"><a id="Seite_118" title="[118]"/></span>
sister and pick her up. But it was Saturday, and in those times, when religion among us Jews in Russia regulated and determined all of life, doing, and acting, I was not allowed to give in to my heart’s desire; after all, the coachman had almost let his passengers starve, practically only because of the Sabbath…</p>
    <p>It grew dark; I set the tea table, made preparations for our dear guests, and waited. Finally, they arrived. How heartfelt was our greeting! We rejoiced so much together! That evening, we went to bed late. I accompanied my sister to the comfortably furnished room for her, kissed her warmly, and invited her to have breakfast with us tomorrow. When we appeared for tea the next morning, my husband was already waiting for us. I immediately noticed a certain shyness in my sister’s demeanor, searched for the cause, but could not find it. My husband left us. We both remained seated at the tea table for a long time, chatting about our experiences. We completely forgot the present and lost ourselves in the past. — Then my husband returned from business. We had lunch in a cheerful mood and chatted continuously until late into the night. — The questioning and storytelling had no end; what did we want to learn from each other after four years of separation!</p>
    <p>When I accompanied Sister Kathy to her room on this second evening of our time together, I again warmly invited her to have breakfast with me and my husband. Then she embraced me</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[119]" id="pgepubid00124"><a id="Seite_119" title="[119]"/></span>
and shyly asked if she could have breakfast alone in her room, and when I, puzzled, asked her for the reason, she answered me awkwardly: “Besides my husband, I have never seen a man in a &gt;Chalat&lt; (dressing gown), and that embarrasses me in front of your husband.” Although I found this modesty, characteristic of Jewish women at the time, somewhat strange, I nevertheless asked my husband to grant my sister’s wish. From then on, despite his inclination for comfort, he appeared fully dressed at the breakfast table. He remained so considerate the entire time; from the first day of her arrival, he always showed his sister-in-law the greatest respect and attention and found it perfectly in order that I always gave her the first place at the table, even when the most distinguished guests were present. Her five-year-old daughter was tenderly loved and cared for by all of us.</p>
    <p>Three months passed since Sister Kathy’s arrival when we received news from our older sister Marie that she would visit us in the next few days. Again, an impatient, joyful anticipation enveloped me. However, several days passed, and she still did not come. All further news from her also ceased. Our uneasiness grew. A possibility for quick long-distance communication like today did not exist. And so, we had no choice but to wait patiently until she surprised us one day. The joy of reunion was tumultuous. Her stay in our house spread general cheerfulness. We became merrier, more youthful. The relationship between my husband and Marie became much cozier and more uninhibited than</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[120]" id="pgepubid00125"><a id="Seite_120" title="[120]"/></span>
his relationship with Kathy. We laughed, sang, and joked all day long. We tried to make the most of everything Luben offered in terms of entertainment to amuse ourselves well.</p>
    <p>Among the amusements that Luben offered during my sister Marie’s stay with us was also the theater, which regularly came to our small town once a year at the time of the great fair. This theater, consisting of a traveling troupe, was still in a very primitive state. A barn served as the theater building here, as was common in provincial towns. The walls were decorated with colorful bedsheets. A raised platform, the stage, was made from planks. Benches, chairs, as well as all the necessary furniture, and even individual articles of clothing, were provided by the wealthy residents of Luben. For this, they had free admission. However, one did not receive free tickets, as is customary today. It was enough to loudly name the borrowed item at the ticket booth to be admitted without further ado. “A candlestick”; “three calico blankets”; “twelve chairs”; “a skirt,” one heard the guests call out. Immediately, the borrowed calico curtain drew back, and the guest could take their seat.</p>
    <p>The performance in these theaters was usually supposed to begin at nine in the evening, but almost never started before eleven o’clock, because they always waited for the local dignitaries.</p>
    <p>During the intermissions, a band played, mostly consisting exclusively of Jewish musicians — “Klesmorim”. Since these were well-known to the audience, it often happened in the theater that guests from their seats</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[121]" id="pgepubid00126"><a id="Seite_121" title="[121]"/></span>
called out their requests to the musicians: “Jankel, play a Polka!” Then again, “a Waltz,” etc. Jankel, of course, fulfilled his acquaintance’s wish, his colleague in turn fulfilled his, so that the intermissions stretched on indefinitely. It often happened that it was already broad daylight when people left the theater.</p>
    <p>The theater was an event in the small town. It was always greeted with great joy, and people attended it every evening. Among the Jews, only the youth went to the theater. The old and pious never visited it, but they let the youth have their way and wisely remained silent about it.</p>
    <p>Since we were counted among the wealthiest in the small town and had lent many items, several seats were allotted to us. We went there almost every evening in large, cheerful company and had a delightful time.</p>
    <p>We had many visitors during this time; up to fifteen people participated in the three daily meals. Strict attention was paid to “Kosher”; dairy and meat dishes were kept separate both in use and when washing.</p>
    <p>On Friday evening, according to Jewish custom, two whole loaves of bread (“Challes”) were placed at each gentleman’s setting for “Mauze”; and the number of gentlemen in those cheerful weeks was not small… there was much to do!</p>
    <p>Marie stayed with us for a few weeks and left us very delighted with the hospitable reception. The solidarity among family members was one of the greatest virtues, which persisted even under the influence</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[122]" id="pgepubid00127"><a id="Seite_122" title="[122]"/></span>
of the entire Sturm und Drang period, which destroyed many good customs of Jewish family life, even if not to the same high degree as before. Like all ethics among Jews, it was rooted in the religious laws, which state: “You shall not estrange yourself from your own blood.”</p>
    <p>And so Kathy, unable to stay at home because of the Crimean War, remained our guest for fourteen months — long, long months, during which the poor woman endured much suffering and sorrow.</p>
    <p>Days and weeks passed. Her confinement was drawing near. My husband’s grandmother, whose medical knowledge and abilities I have spoken of in detail, offered to come to us in Luben. In November, we received news that the self-sacrificing woman was on her way to us. Ill fate would have it that instead of frost and snow, as was usual at this time in Russia, rainy weather prevailed, and instead of a comfortable, quick sleigh ride, the old woman had to make the arduous journey in the “Postkibitka,” a highly primitive carriage without springs. After two days of travel hardships, she arrived at our place, tired and exhausted. Fortunately, she was wrapped in a giant fur coat that protected her from catching a cold.</p>
    <p>The new family offspring did not keep us waiting long. It was a son. After the Brit, the great-mother-in-law departed. Kathy gradually recovered, and we returned to our normal life. As before, no meal passed without guests. The cellar and the poultry yard were always full and offered the guests the</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[123]" id="pgepubid00128"><a id="Seite_123" title="[123]"/></span>
most delicious delicacies. Poultry was very cheap in Luben at that time. I believe it is not without interest to list the prices then: a turkey cost 15 Kop. = approx. 35 Pf., a goose 30 Kop. = 65 Pf., a large fat chicken 30 Kop. = 65 Pf.</p>
    <p>The year 1855. An important epoch for the Russian Empire, the epoch of the Crimean Campaign. The newspapers, which came to Luben three times a week, incessantly brought the most terrible news from the theater of war. One defeat followed another. The Russian army, in which the most incredible chaos reigned, had many difficulties to overcome for which it was not prepared, such as the transport of military personnel, ammunition, and provisions. In the endless steppes of Crimea, many a military detachment that had been transported on foot to the theater of war in winter was found in spring, buried by snowstorms, stiffened, frozen. The Russian nobility, landowners, and merchants equipped entire regiments at their own expense, which were called “Ratniki.” But they were only undisciplined, uncouth peasants who could only be used as cannon fodder on the battlefield.</p>
    <p>If, exceptionally, the Russian army once achieved a victory or a general like Malakoff hit upon a brilliant idea<a id="FNanchor_7_7"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_7_7">[7]</a>, it was only a momentary triumph,</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[124]" id="pgepubid00129"><a id="Seite_124" title="[124]"/></span>
that could not prevent the complete defeat. It was not just a battle of hostile armies, but the struggle of two systems; and victory belonged to the new, better, perfected one, which all achievements of European culture accompanied into the battle.</p>
    <p>The mood among the Russian people grew increasingly somber. Only for those who had long grumbled silently against the existing regime was this defeat a sad satisfaction. For only through external upheavals, they believed, could the mighty empire be healed of its ills.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>In April, I became a mother again. My little son was named Simon. I recovered very quickly.</p>
    <p>Spring announced itself that year with unusual heat. And in addition, the newspapers brought the terrible news that cholera was beginning to rage in the theater of war and its surroundings, and they warned the population to be cautious in eating and drinking.</p>
    <p>I had only a vague memory of this disease from my childhood. A terrible fear seized me, so that no rational arguments were able to calm me. The thought of the plague haunted me like a ghost. It became an obsession from which I could not free myself. My health suffered greatly from it. Melancholy and dejected, I moved about the house.</p>
    <p>And now, defiant fate willed that I should come into close contact with the terrible disease.</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[125]" id="pgepubid00130"><a id="Seite_125" title="[125]"/></span>— It was towards the end of May when we received an invitation from my husband’s aunt to visit her in Kremenchuk, where she lived. We took our eldest child, Lise, with us on the journey south. We were received there with great joy. On the fourth day of our stay, many relatives and acquaintances gathered to get to know me, the niece by marriage. It was very cheerful, and time passed in the most pleasant way for us. The next morning, the aunt came into our bedroom and announced that the plague had already arrived in Kremenchuk, and with tears in her eyes, she told us that many members of yesterday’s lively company were no longer among the living. My horror was boundless. We gathered our belongings, and in a few hours, we sadly and deeply shaken left the city.</p>
    <p>At the first post station, we were no longer allowed into the waiting room. From there, we heard the groans and cries of a cholera patient writhing in pain. So we had to camp outdoors for the night. It was a June night, warm and short. At two in the morning, the sun rose. But this night seemed like an eternity to us. My fear and anxiety increased even more when my little daughter Lisenka began to complain of stomach pains. With trembling hands, I gave the child medicines we had brought from the aunt. For a high fee, I received a little warm water from the peasants, with which I prepared peppermint tea for the child, and with an anxious heart, I awaited the coming day. Finally, we got horses and</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[126]" id="pgepubid00131"><a id="Seite_126" title="[126]"/></span>
continued our journey. The child felt better. The pains subsided, and when we arrived home in the evening, she was completely cheerful again.</p>
    <p>In Luben, we learned that cholera was already raging there too. The doctor came and prescribed a strict diet. That very evening, my sister fell ill quite immediately and suddenly, after having participated in the evening meal just moments before. I was simply possessed by fear, collapsed, and had to be put to bed. — My sister recovered. But she infected her little child, whom she herself nursed, and it died after a day of terrible pain.</p>
    <p>The plague spread from Sevastopol across the entire country with giant strides, and thousands of people fell victim to it. And there were many relatives and friends among them.</p>
    <p>No wonder! It could not have been otherwise given the hygienic conditions at the time, with the complete lack of all precautionary measures. How favorable must the conditions for the spread of cholera have been in the <em class="gesperrt">fifties</em> of the 19th century, when even now, in 1908, cholera rages throughout the summer, autumn, and late into winter, and so many people fall victim to it like flies in the street. And yet, half a century lies between then and now, a period in which Western European culture, in particular, has made such great progress in this direction. But there is a strict border between Western Europe and Russia, and progress only creeps into Russia through smuggling routes: St. Petersburg still has no sewage system today,</p>
    <p><span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[127]" id="pgepubid00132"><a id="Seite_127" title="[127]"/></span>
and the people do not believe in the small, destructive bacteria that are said to live in clear water.</p>
    <p>It is not without interest that among the Jews, the epidemic was considerably less widespread than among the rest of the non-Jewish population. Their life was regulated by law, was simpler, and with its numerous washings and strict dietary prohibitions, it met all hygienic requirements much more substantially.</p>
    <p>I myself suffered terribly, grew weaker and weaker, and lay in bed for days, apathetic and melancholic. My spirit was shaken by the impression of the recent experiences.</p>
    <p>And so July came. One day my
sister received the joyful news of her husband’s arrival.
We all heartily looked forward to his coming; and this
joyful anticipation brought a friendly glow into our
otherwise gloomy lives. During the presence of our
brother-in-law Abraham Sack, who possessed a cheerful, lively disposition,
my melancholy diminished a little, and I
breathed more freely. In the ten days of his stay
with us, we all led our old normal lives. He
departed full of hope for an improvement in his material
circumstances. With him, joy again left
our house. I relapsed into a gloomy, melancholic
mood. My sister remained behind and continued to wait
and longed from day to day, from week to week, for
news. She suffered unspeakably and already feared the
worst. But God has mercy. The greater the need,
the closer the help. The long-awaited letter arrived.
It was addressed to me and contained a letter for
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[128]" id="pgepubid00133"><a id="Seite_128" title="[128]"/></span>
me, a second for sister Kathy. My brother-in-law reported
on the fortunate turn in the course of his
business, which now finally allowed him to take his wife
back to him. Our joy knew no
bounds. We cheered with happiness all day, and
my sister shed tears of emotion and gratitude.
I helped her pack, and in a short time,
she was ready to depart. I accompanied her with my
husband to Poltava, where we helped her to buy an elegant
equipage with three good horses, hired a coachman
and a Jewish cook, and then sent her on her way.</p>
    <p>My brother-in-law’s hopes had been fulfilled. He
had become a rich man. That was one of the great
turns of fate that the war year 1855 brought
with it, the year in which the capricious, veiled woman
Fortuna let the wheel of human destinies in Russia roll
at a faster pace and, with a mighty push,
turned everything upside down, everything at the bottom to the top.</p>
    <p>My brother-in-law’s genius led him ever higher and
higher; his self-confidence gave him perseverance in his
endeavors. And the time was also favorable. Alexander II
had ascended the throne. A new era had dawned.
Capable and honest people could now be active in Russia
in all fields. —</p>
    <p>— We remained in Luben until 1859. In this
year, the three great “Otkupscheriki” — my husband’s grandfather
and father and Mr. Kranzfeld — took over
the concession for the excise tax on the brandy monopoly
— a lease that extended over the entire
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[129]" id="pgepubid00134"><a id="Seite_129" title="[129]"/></span>
Kovno Governorate. In this enterprise,
my husband received a high position. He became Chief
of the Bureau.</p>
    <p>I could sing my wandering song again. — We
liquidated our business in Luben, packed our belongings
together, and went to Kovno.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Before I continue to tell of my further personal life’s fortunes,
I want to speak once more about the
year 1855, which not only in the life of all Russia,
but especially for the Jews, signifies the beginning of a new
epoch. It is the year of the ascension to the throne
of Alexander II.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00135">
      <a id="Alexander_II">Alexander II.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>And God said: Let there be light, and there was light!
The sun rose golden and with its warming
rays awakened all hidden seeds to bloom and to
life: Alexander II ascended the throne in 1855. This noble,
subtle prince recalled the sayings of the royal
Psalmist (Ps. CXIII, 7, 8 and PS. CXVIII, 22):</p>
    <blockquote>
      <div>
        <p>“He raises the poor from the dust,
from the ash heap he lifts the needy, that he
may seat him with princes, with the princes of his
people.</p>
        <p>The stone that the builders rejected has become
the cornerstone.”</p>
      </div>
    </blockquote>
    <p>Alexander II indeed brought these words to fulfillment
by magnanimously freeing 60 million serf
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[130]" id="pgepubid00136"><a id="Seite_130" title="[130]"/></span>
peasants from forced labor and also loosening the most oppressive
chains for us Jews. He opened the gates of his
residences to us, so that a swarm of Jewish youths poured
into the capitals to quench their thirst for Western European
education at the universities.</p>
    <p>In this brilliant period of intellectual flourishing, the subjugated
spirit of the Jews was again allowed and able to
stretch and expand to its heart’s content. The Jew now participated
in the joyful excitement of the great people, in the
upsurge of the fine arts, in the development of
the sciences, and thereby contributed his share to the
intellectual wealth of the country. The effects of the reform
of the forties were already evident after two decades.
There was already a number of Jewish professors, doctors,
engineers, writers, musicians, sculptors, who also found
recognition abroad and brought honor to their country.</p>
    <p>For the emancipation of the Jews in Russia, Governor-General
of New Russia and Bessarabia Count Alexander
Strogonov and Governor-General of Crimea Count
Vorontsov vigorously advocated in the years 1856-1858<a id="FNanchor_8_8"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_8_8">[8]</a>.
They expressed their opinion in response to the
inquiry of the appointed commission (the chairman of this
commission was Count Kiselev) for the solution of the Jewish question
in Russia as follows:</p>
    <p>“If the Jews were to exert a bad influence on the native people,
then it is not advisable to leave them in the northwest of Russia, on the small part
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[131]" id="pgepubid00137"><a id="Seite_131" title="[131]"/></span>
of the native population. — In our view and experience,
it would be more rational to distribute these few million
Jews of Russia throughout the entire great empire and
thereby render them harmless. I am also not far
from the opinion that our native people could learn
many good things from the Jews, such as trade and
abstinence from drinking, modesty in eating.
— It is wrong, in our opinion, to rob
this historically oldest people of all rights that
the native people possess, and at the same time to demand all
duties, to provide money and human resources for the protection
and defense of the country against enemies! One cannot and should not
eliminate the faults of a people with severity.
Like the Western European states, we want to first give the Jews
equal rights; then their supposedly immoral nature will be able to improve.
Liberation from oppression, from misery, will help faster than
all repressive measures. They are excluded from all higher
offices in the land, so they are forced to
resort to trade, sometimes even to deceit. But that
they are diligent, capable, persistent in their old religious
faith, no one can deny.” The commission replied
that there are far fewer Jews in Western European states
than in Russia; they were also much more educated.
Here, there were still difficulties in educating the Jews.</p>
    <p>The course of events brought it about that
the Jews also gained an unforeseen influence in the fields of
trade and industry. Never before
or after did the Jews in St. Petersburg know such a
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[132]" id="pgepubid00138"><a id="Seite_132" title="[132]"/></span>
rich and distinguished life as then, when financial transactions
in the residences were largely in their hands.
Jewish banking houses emerged. Joint-stock companies
were founded, led by Jews. Stock exchange
and banking transactions took on unexpected dimensions.
Here on the stock exchange, the Jew felt in his
element. The stock exchange often created rich people overnight.
But many also plunged into the depths. This type of business
activity was something new in Russia. But it was grasped
with genius by the Jews, even by
those whose only educator had been the Talmud. —</p>
    <p>Towards the end of the 1850s, the old brandy monopoly
“Otkup” underwent a restriction, which was at the same time an improvement
in many respects. While many merchants, Jews, Russians, and
Greeks had enriched themselves in this business since the beginning
of the previous century, the excise system now developed,
which ended in the complete government brandy monopoly.
The introduction of the excise tax alone made the business unprofitable
for entrepreneurs. With the government monopoly, private initiative
ceased completely. Thereupon, Jewish merchants turned their
capital to other branches of trade and developed great activity,
especially in the field of railway concessions.
Here their sober and active spirit found a
grateful field. Great profit rewarded their efforts and
brought large capitals into their hands. The completely new
occupation, of course, demanded a way of life that significantly
deviated from the old accustomed one. Jewish religion and
tradition came under pressure. With this activity,
it was hardly possible anymore for Jewish
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[133]" id="pgepubid00139"><a id="Seite_133" title="[133]"/></span>
employees to cultivate the study of the Talmud as before and
to faithfully observe all religious precepts.
The terms “Akzisnik,” i.e., an employee of the “Otkup” or
of the excise, and “Schmin-Defernik,” which
is an employee in railway construction (chemin de fer), had
become nicknames, as it were. And the old Jewish society
had to tolerate the disregard of traditional customs
among these young people just as much as among
the Jewish bank officials who were forced to ignore the Sabbath and
holidays and could not devote
<em class="gesperrt">one</em> more hour a day to the Talmud,
and — did not want to.</p>
    <p>A folk song gives humorous expression to these conditions:</p>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">And excise young people<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Are dissolute: (<i>boisterous</i>, <i>dissolute</i>)<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Shave (<i>shave</i>) their little beards<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">And ride on little horses<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Go in galoshes<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">And eat unwashed.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="pmb3">From this time also originates a humorous song by Michael
Gordon: “You were indeed Reb Jew in Poltava,”
which, with a whimsical melody, soon became known far beyond the borders
of Russia.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[134]" id="pgepubid00140">
        <a id="Seite_134" title="[134]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00141">
      <a id="Zwei_Worte_sagte_meine_kluge_Mutter">My wise mother said two words.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>“Two things I can certainly say: I and my
&gt;Dor&lt; (generation) will certainly live and
die as Jews; our Einiklach (grandchildren) will certainly not
live and die as Jews. But what will become of our children,
I cannot &gt;raten&lt; (guess, foresee).”
The first two prophetic assertions have
partially been fulfilled; the third is also being fulfilled, for
our generation represents a kind of hybrid.</p>
    <p>Carried away by the irresistibly advancing
stream of new Western European education, we ourselves,
even in advanced age, endeavored to acquire knowledge
in various fields of science and in foreign languages.</p>
    <p>However, while other peoples and nations only absorb
from modern and foreign currents and ideas
what corresponds to their nature, thereby preserving their individuality
and distinctiveness, the Jewish people are burdened by the
curse that they almost never appropriate the foreign and new
in any other way than by renouncing the old, their very own
and most sacred.</p>
    <p>How chaotically modern ideas swirled in the minds of Jewish-Russian
men! Suddenly,
powerfully, irresistibly, the spirit of the sixties and
seventies penetrated Jewish life and destroyed
its previous character. Ruthlessly, people broke
with the old. The old family ideals vanished, without
new ones being able to emerge.</p>
    <p>For most Jewish women of that time,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[135]" id="pgepubid00142"><a id="Seite_135" title="[135]"/></span>
religion and tradition had so deeply permeated their innermost being
that they felt its violation almost like a physical
pain and therefore had to endure a difficult struggle
within their closest family circle.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">In this transitional period, the mother, the natural
educator of her child, was granted the right of education only
for that time when the child required nothing but heavy
sacrifices and heavy fulfillment of duties. But as soon as
the time for intellectual education approached,
the mothers were brutally pushed aside; their authority
and their concern for the child ended. The woman, who still clung
to traditions with every fiber of her being, wanted to teach them
to her child as well: the moral teachings of the Jewish
religion, the traditions of her faith, the consecration of the
Sabbath and the holidays, the Hebrew language, the
study of the Bible, this book of all books, this work
of all times and peoples. She wanted to pass on all this wealth
to her children in beautiful and sublime forms
— along with the results of the Enlightenment,
along with the new things that Western European culture
had brought. But to all pleas and objections,
they always received the same answer from their husbands: “The
children don’t need religion!” The Jewish young men
of that time knew nothing of moderation, and they
<em class="gesperrt">also did not want</em> to know anything about it. In their inexperience,
they wanted to make the dangerous leap directly from the
lowest level of education to the highest.
Some demanded from their wives not only consent,
but also submission, — they demanded from them
the abolition of everything that had been sacred yesterday.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[136]" id="pgepubid00143"><a id="Seite_136" title="[136]"/></span>
Preaching all modern ideas, such as liberty, equality, fraternity,
in society, these young men were at
home the greatest despots towards their wives, who
ruthlessly demanded the fulfillment of their wishes. There
were bitter struggles within the hitherto so patriarchal
and serenely flowing family life. Many
a woman did not want to give in. She allowed her husband
full freedom outside the house, but demanded in
her own house the honoring of the old, cherished customs. That
this double life was not possible in the long run is
easily understood. The spirit of the age triumphed in this struggle; and
with bleeding hearts, the weaker ones gave in. How this
came about for others and for me, I will tell in
the next chapters.</p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00144">
      <span class="gesperrt">Kovno.</span>
    </h2>
    <p>I was very glad that fate brought us back to Lithuania
in 1859, where life was more generous, richer in content,
and the Jews were more intelligent. We settled
in Kovno, which was then a small, beautiful provincial town.
Jews formed the core of the population.
They spoke a mixture of Hebrew and
German here. The Prussian border town of Tauroggen was
not far. So it probably happened that their entire way of life
was not insignificantly influenced by German customs.</p>
    <p>While in the other cities of Lithuania, Jewish
tradition remained completely untouched, in Kovno
the compulsion of tradition had gradually loosened. When we
came to Kovno, the Enlightenment was in full
swing there, and the new ideas found their enthusiastic proponents.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[137]" id="pgepubid00145"><a id="Seite_137" title="[137]"/></span>
In the progressive Jewish households,
mostly among the wealthy merchant families whose fathers
and sons were in business connection with Germany
and frequently crossed the border, apostasy prevailed.
In fact, only kosher cuisine was still maintained.</p>
    <p>The Sabbath was no longer kept holy by the men
and did not interrupt the zeal of business.
If the Jew, according to Heine’s words, was a dog
throughout the week, who only on the Sabbath transformed into a prince
and at the Passover Seder table into a ruler,
then the men of the second generation actually lived
like dogs all year round; without rest or respite, always
in worries and work. The spirit no longer ascended to
heavenly spheres, and the body no longer gathered its strength,
lost during the week’s work, in the strict rest of the Sabbath.
There was a strangely mixed, restless mood on the Sabbath.
The women, who by their very nature cling more stubbornly to the old,
still used to light Sabbath candles on Friday evening
and say the prayer. But the enlightened
husband lit his cigarette from it, and her
otherwise so peaceful face contorted into a painful
smile. With the same cordiality with which the
master of the house had once greeted the Sabbath angels, he now
welcomed his friends to play Préférence with them.
The Kiddush cup stood filled with wine
on the table. But no one sipped from it. It had become
a symbol. But the gefilte fish —
apostasy did not go so far as to banish them from the
Friday evening table. The challahs also remained
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[138]" id="pgepubid00146"><a id="Seite_138" title="[138]"/></span>
preserved. Only that the maid served them neatly
sliced on the bread basket. In place of the
Sabbath songs, the Zemirot, came humorous stories, anecdotes
— the entire realm of Jewish wit. The card game,
however, was allowed to extend far beyond midnight. For
no Chewra T’hillim awaited the gentlemen for prayer
early in the morning. And the Christian servants could
sleep peacefully. For the Sabbath did not prevent the
men from extinguishing the candles themselves. On Saturday,
people got up earlier than usual. It was a day before
Sunday, and there was especially much to do in business.
But also on Sunday, people worked diligently.
For a last remnant of national defiance still prevented everyone
from celebrating this day festively.</p>
    <p>Naturally, the interaction between the two sexes
had also become significantly different.
Dance evenings were organized, in which not only the youth,
but also the married women and men of our
generation participated. That young girls went home from such
gatherings accompanied by gentlemen
had become quite natural; and it followed
from these customs that in houses where grown
girls lived, young gentlemen also socialized.
— A freer tone also prevailed in conversations.
That intimacy with which the Eishes Chayil (the
woman of valor) had once been sung was supplanted by the flaring
enthusiasm for the operetta diva, who was currently
the talk of the day. Cynicism had not remained alien
to the new generation.</p>
    <p>The study of the Talmud naturally ceased completely
in these progressive
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[139]" id="pgepubid00147"><a id="Seite_139" title="[139]"/></span>
circles. Only here and there did a
romantic, who could not let go of the old, continue his Talmud studies
and also had his children taught the Talmud.
Among the “educated,” this rarely occurred.</p>
    <p>Even among the very pious, some parents
recognized the necessity of European education for their children
and allowed them to study in the capital. One thing,
however, they absolutely demanded of their sons: they should
eat “kosher.” These peculiar circumstances are
illustrated by some anecdotes.</p>
    <p>Thus it happened once that very pious parents sent
their son to study in Petersburg. A Christian
friend, who traveled to the capital after some time,
was now to investigate whether the son was truly keeping his promise.
Upon his return, he reassured the
parents and assured them that the son only ate “kosher”
— he himself had dined with him. “What
did you get?” the parents asked interestedly.
— “A rabbit,” the friend replied, “but it was
kosher, for your son told me that it had been slaughtered by the Jewish
butcher (Schochet).”</p>
    <p>The conditions I am speaking of here were, of course,
only characteristic of the strata commonly
referred to as the “upper” classes. Who knows what
place they will occupy when justly governing history
establishes the hierarchy!... However, massive cultural upheavals
do not immediately stir up and disorganize the entire populace.
On the surface, the processes of cultural decline
and growth may proceed faster and more visibly.
In the depths, the transformation often
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[140]" id="pgepubid00148"><a id="Seite_140" title="[140]"/></span>
does not occur at all, mostly in strange forms.
But always incomparably more hesitantly!</p>
    <p>So it was also in Kovno!</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>At that time, in this “enlightened”
Kovno, in another part of the city, across
the bridge of the Viliya River, lived and worked people who, in their
entire life and activity, were pushed by the influence of changed
circumstances precisely onto the opposite path.
And they found faithful fellow travelers among the Jews
of the small towns of the Governorate. They ended up in
asceticism. They were small people, but great humans!
Great in their Talmudic knowledge, in their magnanimity,
charity, and in the greatest virtue, modest
selflessness. They reduced their demands for food, drink, and
clothing to the bare minimum. Their
ideal goals, however, were enormous. They pursued the research,
creation, and pondering of the Talmud now with increased
greed day and night.</p>
    <p>Initially, this group of ascetics consisted of only ten
people. They tirelessly supervised the young, growing
proletariat, observed their learning and their lives,
and admonished them with good and strict words. With
like-minded, worthy men, they later founded
an association that made the preaching of asceticism its sacred
task. Every enjoyment of life seemed contemptible to them.
“This” world was nothing more to them than a transitional stage
to a better, higher, purer existence. Every
step, every action of the day should therefore be well considered.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[141]" id="pgepubid00149"><a id="Seite_141" title="[141]"/></span>
And three times a day one must implore God
to forgive the involuntarily committed sins, even of the
purest.</p>
    <p>The Jewish proletariat in its ghetto, worn down by the
struggle for existence, crowded around these preachers.
Especially, however, the young Talmudists and the
“Orimbocherim” were enthusiastic, carried away by this movement.
These sermons of admonition first took place at dusk,
and the synagogue was overflowing with old and young listeners
as on the eve of Yom Kippur. All wept
and implored God from the depths of their souls for their sins.</p>
    <p>At the head of this movement stood the famous
Reb Israel Salanter (Liebkin), whose greatness of soul approached
that of Hillel. He was hard on himself and full of unspeakable
love for others. He fought for simplicity of
customs. But asceticism should never degenerate into a destruction
of life. It was in the year 1855 when the great
cholera epidemic ravaged the country. The people
fasted to atone, for the eerie disease
was considered a scourge of God. But since Rabbi Salanter feared that
the people might suffer harm from the self-imposed deprivations,
after the morning prayer on Yom Kippur, he stepped into
the synagogue with a piece of cake in his hand onto the
Almemor and ate from it before all the people. By this example,
he wanted to encourage the people to do the same. R. Salanter
was a true teacher of the people. Indeed, wonderful
people had been his educators: Reb Hirsch Broide and
Reb Sundel.</p>
    <p>I know the following stories about the virtues of Reb Broide: The unpaved street where he lived with his
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[142]" id="pgepubid00150"><a id="Seite_142" title="[142]"/></span>
old mother had once been softened by a heavy downpour. Reb Broide knew that his old mother would nonetheless not forgo her daily walk to the synagogue. So, at night, he set about paving the path with bricks so that his mother could go to shul dry-footed. Another story: It aroused his wonder and was at the same time a pain to him that the beggars did not visit him at all. He thought that only the lock on his door could be to blame: it was too strong. So one day he removed it completely. The good man: he had no idea that the beggars knew exactly how poor he himself was. They avoided his house so as not to shame him.</p>
    <p>Reb Sundel used to pursue his studies in fields and forests, in God’s free nature. Once he noticed his student Salanter coming after him. He turned to him with wise words and concluded with the sentence: “Israel, occupy yourself with sermons of admonition and fear God.” These words deeply etched themselves into the young man’s soul and determined his entire life. He soon resigned his office<a id="FNanchor_9_9"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_9_9">[9]</a> in Wilna so as not to have to be unfaithful to his ideal calling.</p>
    <p>While the Hasidim railed against melancholy, his words turned against the exuberance of joy. Hasidism taught to serve God with joy, while the preachers of admonition demanded to serve God with seriousness. Melancholy hinders higher inspiration, the Hasidim claimed. Joy leads to frivolity, the preachers of admonition countered. Action brings redemption, taught Rabbi Salanter, and he never tired of calling the community to acts
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[143]" id="pgepubid00151"><a id="Seite_143" title="[143]"/></span>
of love. Charity and repentance are the pillars of the world. If a person spends only one hour a day in repentance and once protects himself from slander through repentance, he has already accomplished a great deed. The effect of his speech was overwhelming. But the charm of this pure personality was like a spell. It is understandable that the Rabbinate of Lithuania was alarmed by the growth of the movement. It was feared that the preaching of asceticism could lead to the formation of a sect, which Judaism strictly forbids. So the rabbis went to the preachers of admonition themselves and confronted them. This often led to surprising struggles, for which the Enlightenment, of course, only had scorn. After all, the first adherents of the Lilienthal movement lived in Kowno.</p>
    <p>Among them was one of the most striking figures, the Jewish poet <em class="gesperrt">Abraham Mapu</em>, who led a modest life there and earned his living by teaching Russian and German. He was a quiet, unpretentious man, a teacher by nature, who only came alive in his small study and became the Mapu whom the Jewish world honors as its <em class="gesperrt">first</em> great Hebrew belletrist. A wonderful soul lived in this seemingly inconspicuous ghetto Jew. From the narrow, crooked alleys of the settlement district with all their misery and poverty, from the dull, sultry atmosphere of ghetto life, his imagination carried him into the great, glorious past of his people, and full of enthusiasm he wrote his first novel: “<em class="gesperrt">Ahawath Zion</em>”<a id="FNanchor_10_10"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_10_10">[10]</a>, the love of Zion,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[144]" id="pgepubid00152"><a id="Seite_144" title="[144]"/></span>
and in these descriptions showed the Jewish reader the contrast between their present desolate existence and the former splendor and greatness of Jewish life on their own land.</p>
    <p>This romantic work was followed by a powerful, satirical tendentious novel: “<em class="gesperrt">Ajit Zabua</em>”, a grim protest against the traditional forms of Jewish life. “<em class="gesperrt">Ajit Zabua</em>” thrilled the youth and outraged the elders. A storm arose against Mapu, and both he and his work were frowned upon, mocked, and persecuted. But Mapu found his enthusiastic followers among the Jewish youth. He was a fighter for the enlightenment of the Jews. But he fought with entirely new, hitherto unused means — with genuine poetry. He gave the youth <em class="gesperrt">new</em> ideas. He showed them new paths, opened up new horizons and possibilities for life. Many a talent was inspired by him and enthused for Hebrew poetry.</p>
    <p>We often had the opportunity to see the pensive man in our house. He taught my eldest son German and Russian. But he also came for a pleasant chat. My husband revered him greatly; and it was always a pleasure to listen to their lively conversation.</p>
    <p>Our life in Kowno was initially very pleasant. My husband felt in his element here, and although the new customs had at first seemed strange to me, over time I came to like the sociability and the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[145]" id="pgepubid00153"><a id="Seite_145" title="[145]"/></span>
free, simple, yet refined and innocent interaction between the two sexes. My embarrassment gradually vanished, and I gladly participated in the often-held Jours-fix, observing, watching, and also amusing myself. Depending on the mood.</p>
    <p>I still wore my “Scheitel” (wig). All the other women, even the older ones in our circle, had long since freed themselves from it. I felt uncomfortable. But the thought of following the example of other women was far from my mind, although I knew that my own hair could only adorn me. It wasn’t long, however, before my husband demanded the removal of the Scheitel. I had to adapt to the customs of society so as not to expose myself to ridicule.</p>
    <p>However, I did not fulfill his wish and wore the wig for many more years.</p>
    <p>Business was not going well for us in Kowno. It was the time (1859) when unrest began to brew among the people in Russian Poland and Lithuania. The Polish uprising was preparing. The clergy began to preach abstinence (trezwost) among the people — an agitation against brandy; and since the profit of our business was tied to extensive brandy consumption, ruin now threatened us. The monthly lease sum of 120,000 rubles, which the concessionaires were obliged to pay to the state treasury, they soon could no longer afford. The three families: Kranzfeld, Gorodezki, and Wengeroff, who participated in the large enterprise, were materially ruined. My husband could probably still have secured his existence as an employee tolerably. But his
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[146]" id="pgepubid00154"><a id="Seite_146" title="[146]"/></span>
grandfather did not want him to accept a dependent position in a business where he had once been master. He obeyed and became jobless.</p>
    <p>The political propaganda in Poland also swept away the Jewish youth. They took part in the uprising as if it were their own cause and their homeland for which they were fighting. The warnings of the famous Rabbi Meisel in Warsaw, who implored the Jews to return to the Jewish flag, i.e., the Torah, went unheard: they went into battle — for Poland!</p>
    <p>But they were deceived in their hopes. Stronger Russia triumphed. Cossacks rode through Poland, and their Nagaikas did not spare the Jews. But they had to endure even more. They, who had shed their young blood and stood fearlessly, sacrificially in the ranks of the fighters, remained the despised ones. They were made to feel that they were <em class="gesperrt">only Jews</em>. Once again, the Jewish-Polish proverb had proven true: “Jak bida, to do Zyda, po bidzie za drzwi Zydze” — “When trouble comes, go to the Jew; when trouble is over — Jew out!”</p>
    <p>Spring came. Silence returned to the land. But it was not the peace of fulfilled wishes and demands, the smiling peace of victory. It was that eerie silence that spoke in mute words of horror, of blood and exile.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">And we — we stood before nothing. Now it was time to start anew and seek bread. Fortunately, my husband soon found employment in telegraph construction in Wilna. He did not hesitate long and went there.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[147]" id="pgepubid00155"><a id="Seite_147" title="[147]"/></span>
I remained with the three children in Kowno for the time being. After a short time, we were able to follow him to Wilna.</p>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00156">
      <span class="gesperrt">Wilna.</span>
    </h2>
    <p>Wilna, the former residence of Lithuania, was then a large city with imposing state and private buildings, an old town hall, a theater, and magnificent, mostly Gothic, Catholic churches, among which the “Ostrobrama” distinguished itself by its special splendor and a portal of high artistic value. Neither Christian nor Jew was allowed to pass through this gate with covered head. Often, believers were seen falling to their knees as they passed by. Most pious Jews avoided taking this path, although the gate is located in the center of the city.</p>
    <p>Thanks to the rich magnates who lived on their estates in the immediate vicinity of Wilna and maintained commercial ties with the city, industry flourished in the residence.</p>
    <p>At that time, the city still bore a completely Polish character; the Polish language prevailed everywhere, and the entire way of life was determined by Polish customs!</p>
    <p>But things changed: After the Polish uprising in the early sixties of the last century, the notorious Muravyov became Governor-General of Wilna. With unparalleled cruelty, this man tried to eradicate Polishness in his district and Russify the entire country. He was feared, but he also feared himself. He lived in his palace like a prisoner. Even the chimney in his study was bricked up.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[148]" id="pgepubid00157"><a id="Seite_148" title="[148]"/></span>
He slept in his study, and his food was prepared there before his eyes on a spirit stove. He lived in such seclusion that the rumor could form that he did not exist at all. He was a ghost of terror, a mythical person. A small episode. Jewish workers were repairing the roof of his palace. While doing so, they discussed whether there was even a Governor Muravyov. The answer had to be found. And as they were working directly above the only window of Muravyov’s study, they lowered the apprentice on a strong rope so that he could peek into the room through the window. When the boy was hovering in front of the window, the governor saw him and was terribly startled at first. For he believed that an assassination attempt was being planned in a sophisticated way. He raised an alarm. The completely terrified apprentice was cut down. When Muravyov saw the trembling, adolescent boy standing before him, he had to laugh and calmly dismissed the little one without having him whipped. — However, it was not often that Muravyov showed leniency. The executioners found no rest under his rule. It was an almost daily occurrence that unfortunate people were led to the execution site to the sound of drum rolls. A large crowd always gathered, gripped by pain and pity, often also by rage and indignation, accompanying the poor condemned to death. We were sitting at the tea table one morning when dull drum sounds startled us. Rushing to the window, we saw three men being driven to the execution site on a primitive cart drawn by a single horse.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[149]"><a id="Seite_149" title="[149]"/></span>
The vehicle consisted of a board resting on four wheels. On it stood a bench with a backrest and a board on which the names of the so-called criminals were listed. This vehicle was called the pillory. It moved through the streets to the large market square, where a gallows had been erected, at the foot of which the vehicle stopped. The executioners had to support the delinquents, who were already half-dead with fear, to lead them to the scaffold. There, sacks were thrown over their heads and the rope around their necks, and with a single pull of the rope, the execution of all three was carried out. With shudders and horror, I still see the dangling bodies in death throes before me today and will probably never be able to forget the sight. — It is easy to understand that under the rule of this strict man and in memory of the countless victims of the Polish uprising, the agitated people lived in a somber mood. All — Christians and Jews — wore mourning clothes for years. It was considered a crime to appear in bright clothes, even on festive occasions, in the theater or at concerts. But if someone dared, he could be sure that his suit would be doused with petroleum by a Polish patriot.</p>
    <p>When we arrived in Wilna, the city still had its old character. Politically, a city of proud Polishness; culturally — as far as the Jews were concerned — a stronghold of Jewish intellectual aristocracy.</p>
    <p>The Jewish society in this city, which was called the Jewish Athens of Lithuania, consisted of many distinguished,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[150]" id="pgepubid00158"><a id="Seite_150" title="[150]"/></span>
wealthy, and mostly still very conservative families, and a small group of progressives — the representatives of new ideas. These enlightened individuals, however, kept a low profile and did not dare, as in Kowno, to act ruthlessly against tradition. For here in Wilna, the elders held authority. Posterity bestowed the honorary title of “Patriarchs” upon their leaders, such as Reb Elia, the Vilna Gaon, and Reb Akiba Eiger. These names lived on in their full glory in the memory of the Jews. Wilna, the seat of Talmudic scholarship, the city of the great community with its numerous study houses (Bothemidrashim) and the famous synagogue courtyard where hundreds of old and young men studied the Talmud day and night — this Wilna had an oppressive effect on the moderns; and they did not dare to go public with their “enlightened irreligiosity.”</p>
    <p>The new environment had a very favorable influence on my husband; and I was glad to see how, without coercion, merely following an inner need, he turned back to Talmud study and retraced his steps somewhat from the erroneous path he had taken. He now personally taught our son Simon the Hebrew language, read the Bible and the Mishnah with him, which he would never have done in Kowno; he also decided to send the boy to rabbinical school.</p>
    <p>Here in Wilna, I met my sister Helene, whom I had nursed during her bridal year and left behind still suffering. She lived here as a married woman with her husband and children. The joy of reunion was great, but it did not last long.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[151]" id="pgepubid00159">
        <a id="Seite_151" title="[151]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>Our financial circumstances worsened day by day; until my husband had to decide to seek employment elsewhere. He went alone to Petersburg, where he was fraternally received by our brother-in-law Sack, who lived there in wealthy circumstances. Merchants of great style frequented this house; and through their mediation, employment was soon found for my husband. A barracks was to be built in the fortress of the capital Helsingfors on the Gulf of Finland, in Sweaborg. My husband received a good position in this undertaking. In March 1866, he went there, and in the spring of the same year, I followed him with the children to Helsingfors.</p>
    <p>Since we were to live in the fortress in Helsingfors, I became concerned about the education of my two older children, and I decided to take them to the rabbi in Mitau. I wrote to him. — He agreed to all conditions and assured me in his reply that the children would receive a thoroughly modern, European education in his house. This prospect, however, worried me, and I wrote to him again, hoping that despite the modern education, he would maintain a kosher kitchen, otherwise I could not entrust the children to him. I received a satisfactory reply and proceeded with my plan. A strange coincidence, however, thwarted my endeavor: I boarded the wrong train with the two children, changed trains a few times, and instead of arriving in Mitau, I arrived in a city completely unknown to me, and to my great annoyance, I found that I was closer to Wilna than to my destination.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[152]" id="pgepubid00160"><a id="Seite_152" title="[152]"/></span>
This coincidence was decisive, and my children did not go to the school of the Mitau rabbi. — Small causes, great consequences.</p>
    <p>The agreed date for meeting my husband, who was supposed to meet us in Petersburg, was approaching. I had no time left. I therefore immediately started the return journey to Wilna. Soon we met in Petersburg. I told my husband the story of the wrong trains. He laughed and was glad that we all remained together after all. The next day we boarded the steamer that was to take us to Helsingfors.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">And once again, hope for better times blossomed.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00161">
      <span class="gesperrt">
        <a id="Helsingfors">Helsingfors.</a>
      </span>
    </h2>
    <p>We arrived at the fortress of Sweaborg. Foreign people, foreign customs and traditions. A foreign language! I understood neither Finnish nor Swedish and could only communicate with the local servants through the mediation of the only Russian employee. But after only two months, I managed to learn as much as I needed with the help of the Ollendorf method.</p>
    <p>Despite the harsh North and the seven-month severe winter, a cheerful, lively, intelligent people lived here in Helsingfors, Swedes and Finns. Outwardly, these two nations are easily distinguishable from each other. While the Finns, men and women alike,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[153]" id="pgepubid00162"><a id="Seite_153" title="[153]"/></span>
represent a robust, stocky type with blond hair, potato noses, and small eyes, the Swedes are tall with fine, noble facial features, wonderful, strong, blond hair, and healthy, large, white teeth. The population here lived very modestly. Although food was very cheap, their meal usually consisted of herring, boiled potatoes, and black bread. This black bread was baked in autumn by both the common people and the middle class, according to local custom, and a supply for the entire winter was prepared. It had a round shape; in the middle was a hole. They were all strung on a cord and hung up to dry. To this dry black bread, the population claims, they owe their healthy, beautiful, white teeth.</p>
    <p>Even the wealthy in the city led an extremely modest lifestyle, and their meals were not much more lavish. However, in other respects, luxury was indulged in: when it came to education and entertainment, no frugality was known in Helsingfors. The city, which had only twenty thousand inhabitants, had two theaters, three lending libraries, comfortable hotels, and numerous cafes.</p>
    <p>It was a free, proud people who lived here, proud especially towards foreigners — Russians — whom they called “rüssene Pergele” (Russian devils). If one gave alms to a beggar, he would gratefully shake the giver’s hand. A cab driver, however, almost always proudly refused a tip.</p>
    <p>The population was also intellectually advanced, interested
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[154]" id="pgepubid00163"><a id="Seite_154" title="[154]"/></span>
in what was happening in the wider world. Never did a farmer who brought goods to the city return to the countryside without his newspaper “Soimele” (“Finland”).</p>
    <p>Our apartment was in a casemate and consisted of four small, dark rooms, whose walls were assembled from mighty granite stones, probably two meters thick. Our bedroom was peculiar. It had a windowsill large enough for a table and chairs. Of course, it was intended for other purposes. During a war, a less peaceful piece of furniture was supposed to stand there: a cannon! But this bedroom had one advantage: from the window, there was a magnificent view of the Gulf of Finland with its dark, wooded shores. This was my favorite spot. Here I used to sit with the children, resting while doing needlework. Here I could dream, gaze at the vast sea for hours, and listen to its eternal, mysterious murmur.</p>
    <p>We lived in the immediate vicinity of the commandant and the officers, with whom we soon became acquainted and who soon frequented our house.</p>
    <p>One of them offered to teach my older son the Russian language. My husband eagerly threw himself into the study of Finnish and Swedish and soon made such great progress that he could use both languages in business matters. In addition, he learned English with our daughter. The two older children attended a French school in the city. Every day they had to travel across the sea.</p>
    <p>I was proud to see so much eagerness to learn in my husband and the growing youth, proud, happy, and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[155]" id="pgepubid00164"><a id="Seite_155" title="[155]"/></span>
yet at the same time sad, for the urge to learn did not extend to what was most sacred and valuable to me.</p>
    <p>Here in Helsingfors, we lived far from everything Jewish. In this country, there was only a small community of old soldiers who still possessed the privilege of living here since the time of Nicholas I. They had a small synagogue and a so-called rabbi, who was also a shochet (ritual slaughterer).</p>
    <p>A community of “Nikolayevsky” soldiers. That says enough for those in the know. In the 1820s, Jews were conscripted into military service, which lasted twenty-five years, in every possible way. Dragged in! For the service, due to its harshness and length, was considered worse than death. No wonder that the emaciated Jews did not want to be thrown into this abyss while alive. But since 20-30 rubles were paid for the capture of a fugitive Jewish youth — they were often no older than twelve or thirteen years — there were naturally also individuals among the Jews who made a business out of earning as much of such ill-gotten money as possible. If such a “Chapperl”<a id="FNanchor_11_11"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_11_11">[11]</a>, for example, approached a tailor’s workshop, a good friend would quickly come to warn the tailor’s apprentices — and everyone fled faster than from the plague, wherever a hiding place offered itself. Those apprehended were called by the Russian word “Poymeniky” (apprehended ones).</p>
    <p class="pmb1">In a little folk song it says:</p>
    <div class="block2">
      <div class="poem">
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">Tailors sit around the table<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">Oh, oh, oh sewing<br/>
</span>
          <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[156]">
            <a id="Seite_156" title="[156]"/>
          </span>
          <span class="i2">A good brother comes<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">And says the Chapperlach are coming!<br/>
</span>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="p1 pmb1">The number of these folk songs is infinitely large. A series of truly moving pieces is compiled in the excellent collection by Günzburg and Marek. I would like to present a few from my memory here.</p>
    <div class="block2">
      <div class="poem">
        <div class="stanza">
          <span class="i2">How it is bitter,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">My dear Mother,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">:|: A little boat on the green grass:|:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">So bitter it is, my dear Mother,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">They do catch me,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">:|: Like a hare:|:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">I don’t cry, I don’t scream,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">My dear Mother,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">:|: I am not alone in this.:|:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">Take me, and before my heart<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">:|: I sit down and cry.:|:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">How it is bitter, my dear Mother,<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">:|: A little tree without branches (<i>twigs</i>).:|:<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">So bitter it is, my dear Mother<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">They do make me<br/>
</span>
          <span class="i2">Into a Muscovite.<br/>
</span>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="p1">Another song goes:</p>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Oh, woe to Jewish children,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Since they have seen the Like Liwone<a id="FNanchor_12_12"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_12_12">[12]</a>.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">From that time on, they have<br/>
</span>
        <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[157]">
          <a id="Seite_157" title="[157]"/>
        </span>
        <span class="i0">No good, and no N’chome<a id="FNanchor_13_13"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_13_13">[13]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">When Jewish children are led to the Priom<a id="FNanchor_14_14"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_14_14">[14]</a>,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">The N’schome<a id="FNanchor_15_15"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_15_15">[15]</a> trembles.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Therefore we pray to You, Reboine schel oilom<a id="FNanchor_16_16"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_16_16">[16]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You should give us for our Zar<a id="FNanchor_17_17"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_17_17">[17]</a> a little Nichome.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Bitter is our life, just like death<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">As we must eat the Jewonischen Broit<a id="FNanchor_18_18"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_18_18">[18]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">As we must go dressed in “schatnes“<a id="FNanchor_19_19"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_19_19">[19]</a>,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">This is our bitter need.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">He who is in Heaven understands. God, God, why are You pourisch<a id="FNanchor_20_20"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_20_20">[20]</a> from us!<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You know that we cannot keep Your geseres<a id="FNanchor_21_21"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_21_21">[21]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">This is our bitter Breres<a id="FNanchor_22_22"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_22_22">[22]</a>,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Therefore we pray to You, Reboine schel oilom<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You should be moichel sein<a id="FNanchor_23_23"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_23_23">[23]</a> to us for our Aweres<a id="FNanchor_24_24"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_24_24">[24]</a>.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Your punishment we do M’kabel-b’ahwe<a id="FNanchor_25_25"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_25_25">[25]</a> accept<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">When they take away our beard and peyos<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">It squeezes our hearts<br/>
</span>
        <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[158]">
          <a id="Seite_158" title="[158]"/>
        </span>
        <span class="i0">As we are ashamed of ourselves;<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Therefore we pray to You, Reboine schel oilom<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You should take us out of gules.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Who will be our redeemer and our deliverer<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">As we are deep in goischke hands,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">This is our pain and suffering,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Therefore we pray to You, Reboine schel oilom<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You should be our redeemer and deliverer.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Silver and gold the sdatozikes<a id="FNanchor_26_26"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_26_26">[26]</a> lay before us<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">So that the Prijomschick<a id="FNanchor_27_27"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_27_27">[27]</a> should say we are indeed fit for soldiers<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Thus, from our fathers and mothers, their eyes do not dry.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Shabbat and holidays they spend.<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Chaleschen<a id="FNanchor_28_28"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_28_28">[28]</a> does our heart from the great Gerasch<a id="FNanchor_29_29"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_29_29">[29]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">At home we had Cholev and Dwasch<a id="FNanchor_30_30"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_30_30">[30]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">When the bitter Ukas<a id="FNanchor_31_31"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_31_31">[31]</a> is read<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">No young man should show himself on the street.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">Death we certainly wish for ourselves, as we must bow to the Naczalnik’s<a id="FNanchor_32_32"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_32_32">[32]</a> feet<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">When the Naczalnik shouts Paschol<a id="FNanchor_33_33"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_33_33">[33]</a>, we must accept it as sweet as sugar.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[159]" id="pgepubid00165">
        <a id="Seite_159" title="[159]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">On Yom Noroim<a id="FNanchor_34_34"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_34_34">[34]</a> we do blow the shofar<a id="FNanchor_35_35"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_35_35">[35]</a><br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">When the bitter ukas is read, we run away like hares<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">On fields and in forests we spread out like grass,<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">Therefore we pray to You, Reboine schel oilom<br/>
</span>
        <span class="i0">You should release us from goles<a id="FNanchor_36_36"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_36_36">[36]</a>.<br/>
</span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="p1">To escape this “Gesere“, there was only the well-known means for the rich — the rubles —, but for the poor, only one way: Since only the unmarried were conscripted for military service, boys had to be married off at the earliest age. It was not uncommon for the little ones to be led from the playground under the “Chuppah“.</p>
    <p>At that time, the rumor also spread among the people that the government wanted to take Jewish girls into state factories. Perhaps this rumor arose to make the hesitant parents of girls compliant. They were naturally now all the more quickly willing to marry their underage daughters to underage boys.</p>
    <p>This “Chapperei“ was called “Behules“ by the Jews.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[160]" id="pgepubid00166">
        <a id="Seite_160" title="[160]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>It was an almost unnatural state. And in that time, the foundation was probably laid for the degeneration of a large part of Russian Jewry. These adolescent girls became <em class="gesperrt">mothers</em>. Mothers of children whose fathers were still half-children. But the poor parents also made these sacrifices. The human being might be endangered! But faith, Judaism, must not suffer!</p>
    <p>It was, after all, inevitable that military service precluded the observance of all Jewish customs, this sacred heritage. Those were the more fortunate ones, who were destined to come to cities with a Jewish community, where they were at least provided with ritual food by the community.</p>
    <p>These difficult military years offered only one advantage: If these Jewish soldiers had not succumbed to the unheard-of exertions and brutalities of their half-brutish “superiors“ and had survived the twenty-five years of their service with an intact body, they were allowed to live anywhere in Russia. This privilege sometimes brought them into more favorable circumstances, so that they often later became rich people. But the majority of them did not get that far.</p>
    <p>I now had to live in a community of Nikolayev soldiers. To Wilna—Helsingfors!</p>
    <p>I had great difficulty running a ritual kitchen under such conditions: The meat always had to be brought from the city, and I myself had to take care of the kitchen because I did not want to rely on a Christian cook. And how the difficulties accumulated before Passover, only a religious woman and a good, truly Jewish hostess can understand.</p>
    <p>But despite all these difficulties, the fervent wish to preserve tradition for the children helped me
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[161]" id="pgepubid00167"><a id="Seite_161" title="[161]"/></span>
and above all, love, the warm, loyal love for my husband. Not for nothing do people say: “With a beloved man, even across the sea.“</p>
    <p>We searched for a Jewish teacher for the older children but could not find one. So it happened that my husband himself taught the older son. But he was no teacher, had little patience, and often lost his temper. “You donkey, what will become of you?“ he often shouted at him, which not infrequently led to physical altercations. This treatment could not have an encouraging and stimulating effect on the child; the lesson became a torment for him. I often had to intervene and calm the agitation. The lessons soon stopped, and we tried to hire a Jewish soldier who lived in the fortress as a teacher. But unfortunately, he did not want to accept our proposal.</p>
    <p>This Jewish soldier, who was described to us by Captain Sommer as a saint, was such an unusual and interesting phenomenon that I must speak of him in more detail. Religious, modest, silent, and quiet, he led an almost ascetic life. Both his superiors and his comrades spoke of him as a divine man. He was treated with special distinction by everyone. Despite the preferential treatment he received, he never neglected his duties, always appeared punctually on the parade ground, and was diligent in service. The rest of the time he spent bent over Talmudic folios, in his own small room that had been granted to him.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[162]" id="pgepubid00168">
        <a id="Seite_162" title="[162]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>His diet consisted of black bread, “Kvass“ (a carbonated, non-alcoholic drink), potatoes, and herring. For religious reasons, he never ate from the communal pot. On the Sabbath, he received leave to go to the city to have a proper meal there.</p>
    <p>His knowledge of the Talmud was deep and significant; and not infrequently, my husband sat with him, of whom no one knew anything more specific, who never wanted to reveal anything about his origin, in his tiny, unheated room and discussed with him. My husband counted these hours on the lonely island among the most interesting. He always returned from there in a good mood and told me with admiration about this solitary man, who was known in the regiment as Arkadius Petrov.</p>
    <p>He did not take over my son’s lessons; he refused our request, stating that it would take up too much of his time.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>A year and a half passed. Our life flowed peacefully and pleasantly under the cold and remote sky.</p>
    <p>The construction of the barracks was nearing its end, and my husband looked for another occupation.</p>
    <p>He went to St. Petersburg. I was once again left alone with the children — It was December — short, dark days, followed by those stormy northern winter nights. It was a sad time for me!</p>
    <p>During the day, I didn’t have much time left for reflection. I was busy with the household and the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[163]" id="pgepubid00169"><a id="Seite_163" title="[163]"/></span>
children. But at night, in the endless, lonely nights, I lay for hours with wide-open eyes and listened to the rushing of the wind, to the howling of the hungry wolves that the wild storm relentlessly chased from the frozen shores into the sea. The voices had become so familiar to me that I chatted with them and complained to them of my sorrow and suffering — And a thousand-voiced answer came — First a murmur like lamentations, weeping, and groans — so heartbreaking that I forgot my own sorrow over it. Gradually the sea calmed down, and suddenly a thousand cheerful, joyful, tender sounds arose from the depths and echoed through the air like silver bells.</p>
    <p>So time passed. Finally, after a few weeks — how eternally long a week can be! — my husband returned from Petersburg happy and content, for he had been employed there as a manager in a newly founded bank. However, we remained in the Sweaborg fortress until the final completion of the barracks construction.</p>
    <p>Spring came.</p>
    <p>On the third day of Passover, God blessed me with a daughter, whom I named Sina. They were difficult, difficult hours.</p>
    <p>The barracks were completed; they were to be taken over by the fortress authorities. For this purpose, the two partners of the enterprise came from Petersburg: Mr. Hessin and Mr. Klonski, an older gentleman who addressed my husband with “du“ (thou/you, informal) according to good, patriarchal custom. Although my husband was 35 years old at the time, he took
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[164]" id="pgepubid00170"><a id="Seite_164" title="[164]"/></span>
no offense at this informal address, for respect for age had become ingrained in him.</p>
    <p>Today, such behavior towards a young person would be almost out of the question. A glance would teach the familiar “old man“ that he had forgotten the respect due to <em class="gesperrt">youth</em>.</p>
    <p>My husband went to Petersburg. Once again, I was left alone with the children, for a long, infinitely long, ten months.</p>
    <p>During this time, my eldest son became Bar Mitzvah. He received tefillin, which he put on every day for prayer from then on. His eagerness to read increased more and more, and I had to give my consent for him to read newspapers every day at the city’s confectionery. Visitors there were always surprised that such a small boy could so quickly read through Russian, German, and French papers; he told me all the news.</p>
    <p>And once again, I stood ready to travel with my children. We boarded the steamer that was to take us to Petersburg and made ourselves comfortable in the cabin. At my request, lunch was served to us there — it was a lavish meal, but we could only half enjoy it, for I did not partake of the meat dishes, which were not kosher, and a glance from me was enough for the children to leave them untouched as well.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">We traveled for 24 hours and arrived in Petersburg tired.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[165]" id="pgepubid00171">
        <a id="Seite_165" title="[165]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00172">
      <span class="gesperrt">Petersburg.</span>
    </h2>
    <p>In the seventies, under the government of Alexander II, Petersburg was at its peak. The main part of Petersburg, where the most bustling and elegant activity prevails, is Nevsky Prospekt and Morskaya. Here, before our eyes, Russian street life unfolded day and night, reflecting the entire Russian character. At every time of day, a different picture, always very peculiar and very interesting.</p>
    <p>Eight o’clock in the morning. The streets of St. Petersburg are dominated by youth, rushing from all ends of the city to their schools. School hours throughout Russia begin at 9 AM and last until 3 PM, with only a one-hour break from twelve to one.</p>
    <p>There, small and large gymnasium students rush in their gray and silver uniforms. The university students in black and blue with golden buttons, their wide-brimmed caps jauntily pushed to the side. The girls in their simple brown dresses with black aprons, which, defying all fashion, are made according to a strictly prescribed style... outwardly all looking the same. Both male and female students carry a satchel that, according to school regulations, must be worn on the back.</p>
    <p>Greeting each other on the way, speaking loudly, they rush past each other, each to their destination, cheerful, exuberant.</p>
    <p>The lorries that traverse the most elegant streets in the morning draw attention to themselves. A large, clumsy horse, which has not felt a cleaning brush on its coat for years, pulls the wagon covered in mud and dirt.
     <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[166]" id="pgepubid00173"><a id="Seite_166" title="[166]"/></span>
The hundredweight load is covered with a ragged and tattered tarpaulin. Wagon and horse only await the beneficial rain that will once free them from the dirt. Perfectly matched to the wagon and horse is the unkempt coachman with his green cap and the sheepskin coat, torn at the sleeves, which serves him as both clothing and a sleeping blanket.</p>
    <p>Twelve o’clock noon. The hour strikes from the Peter and Paul Church, a cannon shot rings out from the fortress. People on Nevsky Prospekt mechanically pull out their pocket watches to set them. The streets offer a different picture again: governesses, nannies, the Russian “Nianias“ (childminders) and the dressed-up wet nurses in their national costumes lead the children for a stroll along the beautiful wide Nevsky.</p>
    <p>At four o’clock in the afternoon, the corso begins in Petersburg, offering a magnificent sight, especially in winter. What luxury comes to light during these rides! The most splendid sleighs, the rarest thoroughbred horses, the most exquisite outfits, and the most precious furs are paraded there.</p>
    <p>The corso moves from Nikolayevsky Station through Nevsky, the large and wide Morskaya, to the “Pozteluyev Bridge“. The path is so wide that three rows of sleighs can comfortably drive side by side. All splendid, spacious sleighs (mainly private sleighs), lined inside with sheepskin and carpets, a black bearskin as a blanket. Over the horses are blue,
     <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[167]" id="pgepubid00174"><a id="Seite_167" title="[167]"/></span>
red, green, sometimes white nets spread. Silver harness. The coachman is usually of unusual girth, as his padded coat (“Yarmak“) is almost a meter wide from shoulder to shoulder. It is an overcoat, buttoned with a red, green, blue, or white belt, corresponding to the color of the net. This overcoat covers the coachman and occupies half of the sleigh, so that it looks as if the coachman is sitting on the laps of his masters. On his head, a square padded, red velvet cap, adorned with fur trim and gold cord. White or yellow long gloves with gauntlets complete this peculiar attire of the Petersburg aristocratic coachmen.</p>
    <p>In the sleighs, ladies and gentlemen, wrapped in the most precious furs. Here and there, a “Likhach“ whizzes by with uncanny speed — a single-horse sleigh with a small sled, no larger than an armchair. One sees no more than a beaver fur, and above it a small, coquettish fur cap.</p>
    <p>The public drives so close to each other that not only short greetings can be exchanged, but also questions and answers fly back and forth. People arrange rendezvous and exchange compliments.</p>
    <p>The glittering, crunching snow, the neighing of the horses, the soft rustle of silk fabrics, the laughter and chatter of the public, the splendor and luxury of the sleighs and their occupants — this creates a picture that always fascinates not only foreigners but also locals anew.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[168]" id="pgepubid00175">
        <a id="Seite_168" title="[168]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>With the move to Petersburg, I faced a future that surpassed the past, the present, and all expectations in events and changes.</p>
    <p>The milieu we entered in Petersburg consisted of distinguished, educated people, mostly wealthy and luxurious, who led an almost carefree existence. Although the Petersburg Jewish society possessed a large, magnificent synagogue and had two rabbis — a modern, educated one and an orthodox one — much separated them from Jewish custom and Jewish tradition. The elite adopted many foreign traditions and celebrated foreign festivals, such as Christmas. Of their own holidays, only two were still observed: Yom Kippur and Passover. But they were celebrated “modernly“. Some calmly arrived at the synagogue in a carriage and ate on Yom Kippur during breaks.</p>
    <p>The Passover festival maintained itself even in the most progressive circles. It remained a festival of remembrance. Not, of course, of the Exodus from Egypt, but of one’s own childhood in the small Lithuanian towns. The Seder evening was celebrated, but in a very abbreviated way. Even baptized Jews did not want to separate themselves from the Seder evening. Even if they did not arrange a special meal in their own home, they were still happy to be invited by their acquaintances—those not yet baptized. It looked quite festive. The hostess in her finest attire, the children carefully dressed, the guests in tailcoats and white ties. The table was adorned with a pile of matzahs, heaped on a tray. A bowl with eggs, green salad, and radishes was prepared.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[169]" id="pgepubid00176"><a id="Seite_169" title="[169]"/></span>
Of course, there was no shortage of good wine. And yet, the gentlemen usually preferred the “Zmukim” (raisin wine), which reminded them so strongly of their parental home. Prayers and the whole series of old, symbolic customs were dispensed with. The conversation did indeed last until midnight. But it was not about the Exodus from Egypt, but about daily issues, newspaper news, stock market dealings. The meal was quite rich and, of course, began with eggs enjoyed in salt water. Then followed stuffed pike, meat broth with tasty dumplings, and roast turkey. It was a cozy supper with a few peculiarities, but nothing more. It actually only shared the name with the Seder evening. No Haggadah lay on the table; it lay somewhere in an old wooden box peacefully with the yellowed Talmud copies, the Bible, and old Hebrew books. The questions were not asked. Hands had been washed at home with perfumed soap. And when drinking wine, no further importance was placed on whether there were exactly four cups. Of course, the game of Preference took the place of the blessing.</p>
    <p>What I describe here were the new customs of a refined, thin upper class of Petersburg Jews.</p>
    <p>The majority, however, had remained faithful to the old, traditional religion, to tradition, and among them were not a few who belonged to the elite of Jewish society.</p>
    <p>To live in this environment and remain untouched by its influence required a strength of character and a religious steadfastness that my husband, unfortunately, did not possess. It would have left me untouched; my
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[170]" id="pgepubid00177"><a id="Seite_170" title="[170]"/></span>
strong faith, my upbringing, and the religious devotion with which I adhered to Jewish custom would have preserved me from unfaithfulness. Yes, I would have walked proudly among all the weak. Proud and happy that I was still in possession of all the intimate richness that they had long since lost. And I would have pitied them for their poverty.</p>
    <p>And yet, precisely here in Petersburg, where Jews renounced so many Jewish customs, I often had the opportunity to observe how strongly the sense of belonging was developed among Jews despite everything: If Jews in the provinces were defeated in a dispute with the authorities, they turned to Petersburg for support; and the Petersburg Jewish society never spared money or time to represent the cause of their fellow tribesmen. Appeals were made, and the highest authorities were set in motion so that the distressed Jews would receive their rights; and this zeal was natural and self-evident to everyone. It is not for nothing that the solidarity of Jews has become proverbial throughout the world. Even most baptized Jews were no exception. Indeed, it was considered good form in Petersburg Jewish society to establish charitable institutions for Jews, where hundreds of children received shelter, upbringing, and education. —</p>
    <p>It was similar in our home to so many other families where the struggle for tradition was fought. “The man, the earner, who has the duty to provide for his own, also possesses the greater right; he is the master of the house, he can ask, but he may also
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[171]" id="pgepubid00178"><a id="Seite_171" title="[171]"/></span>
demand,” it was said there. My husband also <em class="gesperrt">asked</em> first, and when he did not achieve his goal with that, he <em class="gesperrt">demanded</em> the fulfillment of his wishes. He became despotic and lost all sense of proportion.</p>
    <p>With his simple, calm, honest nature, with the boundless trust he placed in people, he did not fit into city life, with its hustle and bustle, its striving and struggling. Despite his knowledge and abilities, he did not fare well financially, and in the giant enterprise in which he participated, he could not advance. This pained and tormented him. For the times when he was a great lord, rich and distinguished, were still fresh in his memory. At least in his home, within his own family circle, he wanted compensation for this injustice. Here he wanted to be completely master — and he was, in the fullest sense. It was not enough that I allowed him complete freedom outside the house. I had to “reform” myself and my home.</p>
    <p>At first, they were trifles, but dear, familiar trifles that had grown close to my heart, from which I had to part. But the revolutionaries were not yet satisfied. More was demanded; and the foundations of our previous life were <em class="gesperrt">ruthlessly destroyed</em>.</p>
    <p>It was here in Petersburg that, right at the beginning of our stay, I had to remove my “Scheitel” (wig). It was here that, after the most vehement resistance, I abolished kosher cuisine and gradually drove <em class="gesperrt">one</em> beautiful, old custom after another from my home. — No, I did not drive them out; I accompanied each
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[172]" id="pgepubid00179"><a id="Seite_172" title="[172]"/></span>
of them to the last gate of my house with sobs and tears. With a bleeding heart, I let them depart and watched them for a long, long time — and was as sad as if I were burying what was most precious. How I suffered then, what spiritual struggles I had to endure! I had no inkling of this in my youth, when I still so happily lived the contemplative, quiet, proud, patriarchal life in my parents’ home. Although I loved my husband as passionately and faithfully as in the first period of our life together, I could not and was not allowed to give in without resistance. For myself and for the children, I wanted to preserve this precious heritage and fought a battle for being or non-being.</p>
    <p>The whole life in Petersburg was such that even a thousand different experiences always converged on the single problem of Judaism. What worry and heartache my son’s gymnasium years brought me! Simon was a student at the fourth gymnasium. One day, the boys were led to the gymnasium chapel for a service. Everyone knelt before the holy images. Only my son remained standing. The class supervisor ordered him to kneel immediately. My son firmly refused: “I am a Jew. And my faith forbids me to kneel before an image.” The supervisor left in a rage. After the service, Simon was called: he was dismissed. Tomorrow he was to pick up his papers. That was bad news. This worry too! I rushed to the Popetchitjel, pleaded, lamented. My son had not wanted to disregard school discipline. He only wanted to be true to the upbringing he had received in his parents’ home
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[173]" id="pgepubid00180"><a id="Seite_173" title="[173]"/></span>
and in the rabbinical school. Respect for parental authority was also an important educational factor. Where it ceases, vice perhaps begins. But Prince Liwin remained firm. I could no longer speak. The pain choked my throat. Tears upon tears welled from my eyes. I saw my son’s life happiness destroyed. I ran out. But no sooner had I reached the anteroom than the Prince called me back. He was to leave this gymnasium. But he would see to it that he was admitted to another. And so it happened. I found peace again and enjoyed with deep satisfaction the joy over my son’s proud action. That was blood of my blood. But could I hope, under the foreign influences, that the children would always follow the mother’s way? They grew older. They understood in their own way what was happening around them and — sometimes sided with their father. So I was often isolated: my husband, society against me. I succumbed. But no one suspected the tragedy of those days that I lived through then.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Only a few yellowed pages, to which I had confided my sorrow thirty-eight years ago in an hour of despair, are silent, rigid witnesses to my suffering — I append here those words that I wrote on April 15, 1871, for they seem to me to be of more general interest, as they express the pain and desperate struggle that not only I alone, but many a wife and mother, had to endure during this difficult transitional period of Jewish life.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[174]" id="pgepubid00181">
        <a id="Seite_174" title="[174]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
