<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="de">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <title>
      The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoiren einer Grossmutter, Band II, by Pauline Wengeroff.
    </title>
    <link href="5858602757301170732_cover.jpg" rel="icon" type="image/x-cover" id="id-7644795048969180271"/>
    <link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.8 by Project Gutenberg"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00182">
      <a id="Die_gefahrliche_Operation_Die_Reform_der">The Dangerous Operation. — The Reform of the
Kitchen.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>… The ulcer has grown so large that it threatens to
suffocate me! What to do? Where to seek advice? Where to find the
strength to fight? Oh, dear G-d, grant me
spiritual strength to endure the operation without lasting damage!
I feel too weak to
overcome this. It is a battle of life and death. I
miscalculated my own strength and did not believe
that this last reform would plunge me into such anxiety
and such a strong conflict with myself.
Why is it so hard for me to overcome my previous
principles? I believe my devoted
nature is to blame. The reverence and love for
my parents are inseparably linked for me with the reverence
for their religious customs. Despair
overcomes me when I think of the necessity of my actions,
on which my future salvation, my peace and
contentment, even the happiness of my children are said to
depend. It will surely strike a deep wound in the hearts of my
parents. I have been a loving daughter to them until now.
Now they have every right to curse me — Yes, I
understand their burning pain. I am a mother myself!</p>
    <p>But where are my own principles? Yes, they are
there. For fifteen years I have fought to maintain them.
They have grown dear to my heart, passed into my flesh and blood.
But now they have become a troublemaker and an offense
to all my family; every moment all tenderness, all respect, and love
are shattered by them. — And
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[175]" id="pgepubid00183"><a id="Seite_175" title="[175]"/></span>
what makes me so unhappy in my current state
is my husband’s relationship with me. He never
understood, or never bothered, to see me as anything
other than a necessary object for himself. He
never considered that I have my own
principles, habits, that I came to him from my
home with memories, indeed even with certain experiences;
and that the manifold circumstances of life
have developed and strengthened my steadfastness. He
did not bother to approach my inner being
and recognize it. Above all, he demands from me
submissiveness and the denial of my principles. No,
my friend, I am not able to fulfill this last wish of yours
without murmuring. You should have
gradually prepared me for it, then it might
not have become so mortally difficult for me! But since that did not happen,
since you remained a stranger to my inner life,
my attachment to my parents and my sense of duty
towards them grew stronger day by day. I created
my own world within me, from which I now find it so hard
to separate myself. Oh, G-d in heaven, only you can be an impartial
witness to my suffering! To whom shall I
complain! Do you understand me, my husband? Do you not
interpret my consequences as stubbornness,
can you not see something higher, nobler in it,
than obstinacy? And the children? They are still too
young — but they will come to your side.
They are children of their time!</p>
    <p>The knife is sharpened. I must decide.
The operation must go ahead, for I am suffocating! Only
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[176]" id="pgepubid00184"><a id="Seite_176" title="[176]"/></span>
I ask for time, so that I may first fight the battle with myself
and gather my spiritual strength. Oh, who
will help me? No one! Back then into my own world,
into my heart, into the company of my thoughts, into the
world of my past, which is a rich history,
and into the impenetrable future. I want to offer this
terrible sacrifice on the altar of my domestic hearth.
I cannot say that I have fulfilled my duty
 as a wife and mother until I have also yielded to this
wish of my family. What is my
life without love, without attachment, and in perpetual
strife with those closest to me? After every scene
because of this ominous question, I see death before my
eyes. The bitterness I always feel could
poison three lives, and not just one! Therefore, you executioners,
sharpen your knives, I am ready. With this act, I want to put an
end to the eternal mockery of religion in my house.
I would rather commit the terrible deed myself
and with this action save the true foundation
of religion, faith. Perhaps I must not hesitate any longer
if I am to prevent the worst. — Nowadays
one must be a Hillel and not a Shammai<a id="FNanchor_37_37"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_37_37">[37]</a>.</p>
    <p>Oh, what a heavy, unspeakably heavy burden you have placed upon me, G-d!
I live in the most difficult transitional period, in
which we Jewish women entered marriage without any personal rights,
in which our husbands regard themselves as
our masters or servants, but never as our friends.
Oh, dead paper, do you not feel what
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[177]" id="pgepubid00185"><a id="Seite_177" title="[177]"/></span>
words I have written down here? I feel
terrible. My senses are fading. My hand
refuses to serve. I throw the paper far from me.
Should I wish that it might one day fall into someone’s hands?</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>Thus, the non-kosher kitchen was
introduced in my house. For this sacrifice that I made for my family,
I demanded the fulfillment of one wish: Fifty-one
weeks of the year I had to live as they
wanted, one week, that of the Passover holidays, should belong
to me. And no one should stand in my way of celebrating
these holidays exactly as I was accustomed to from home.
And so it remained.</p>
    <p>A good friend, of course, hastened to inform my father
of this reform in my house.
My father listened to him calmly, was wisely silent for a while,
and then said, “If my Pessele did it, then
she had to do it.”</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>In addition to these religious struggles at home, there was also the
struggle for existence. My husband’s business affairs
remained consistently unpleasant. He had no luck either as a
bank employee or as a stockbroker.
He felt dejected and tired, for the bad
Petersburg climate had a detrimental effect on his health.
The children grew up. Their upbringing demanded
resources that exceeded ours. Our material
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[178]" id="pgepubid00186"><a id="Seite_178" title="[178]"/></span>
circumstances did not keep pace with the needs, which
grew greater day by day due to our social interactions.
I had many difficult hours to endure.
But I did my utmost to conceal our material situation
from the children and strangers. The hope
for better times never left me. I worked and
worked so that happiness, should it ever come, would not find
a destitute family. This hope gradually took
form and shape in my imagination — I
saw before our apartment the undefined, the wonderful,
waiting to bring us the good news and
gently open our door —</p>
    <p>But it opened it ever so gently and slowly —</p>
    <p>It was a fortunate turn for us when
my husband was offered the position of Vice Director of the Commercial Bank
in Minsk. We did not hesitate long,
packed our belongings, and moved to
Minsk.</p>
    <p>That was towards the end of 1871.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">Finally, material worries left us. In a short
time, my husband received the position of Director, and from
then on, we again led a rich, distinguished life
in Minsk.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[179]" id="pgepubid00187">
        <a id="Seite_179" title="[179]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00188">
      <a id="Die_dritte_Generation">The Third Generation.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>And the third generation came, which feared neither G-d nor
the devil. They paid the highest homage
to their own will and elevated it to a
deity. Incense was strewn for this deity.
Altars were erected for it; and without shyness, without regard,
the holiest sacrifices were offered to it. It was the
tragedy and fate of this youth that they grew up
without tradition. Our children received no
impressions from the memories of historical, independent
Judaism. Alien to them remained the lamentations
on Tisha B’Av, alien the longing for Zion, the land
of the great past, living in the prayers recited three times daily,
alien the rhythm of the Jewish holidays, according to which a joyful one
always follows a sad one. They found no inspiration anywhere — this generation.
They became atheists.</p>
    <p>Perhaps some young reader may believe that
I see the circumstances too gloomily. Is my memory
clouded and do dark veils cover my eyes?! Oh no.
I am a faithful chronicler. My clear gaze sees only
the deep shadows, because they truly cover the paths of the new
youth completely.</p>
    <p>The third generation! Show me happiness, show me
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[180]" id="pgepubid00189"><a id="Seite_180" title="[180]"/></span>
the nobility of your morals — and I will bow before you!…</p>
    <p>… Gradually, the fathers, who had removed Jewish custom and
Jewish tradition from their children’s upbringing and
had them educated exclusively in the modern, enlightened-European
sense, recognized their fateful mistake.
They themselves, even if they had turned away from religion and
tradition, remained Jews at heart.
Good Jews in the national sense of the
word, proud of their past; for in them still lived
the memories of their childhood. But their children
no longer had these memories; their own parents,
mainly the fathers, were to blame. And not
infrequently, more sensitive young people, who recognized their
inner poverty, accused their parents!</p>
    <p>There was indeed a possibility to somewhat compensate for the shortcomings of home
education: through organized
religious instruction in public schools.
Competent teachers could have easily turned the interest of the youth
to the great Jewish past, directed their attention
to ancient Hebrew poetry, the history
of the Jews, and in this way awakened in them the proud
certainty that they belonged to a people
whose culture and history are ancient, rich in content, and profound.
Then Jewish youth would not have been lost immediately upon
first contact with school youth of other origins.
They would not have had the feeling of humiliation
that every memory of their Jewish ancestry brought them.
They would not have turned away from
their own people with such fury, forgotten their duties
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[181]" id="pgepubid00190"><a id="Seite_181" title="[181]"/></span>
and ruthlessly placed their energies at the service of the “others,”
as they did. — But unfortunately, Jewish
religious teachers were not always and everywhere up to
their task. Only very few understood
their mission.</p>
    <p>In the 1860s, the Russification of the
Jews by the government began. — In the first epoch of the
Enlightenment, during the period of Mendelssohn’s influence,
the language of instruction in Jewish schools was German.
Now the mood had changed; the “Enlightened”
accommodated the government’s Russification tendencies
because they expected political freedoms in the future
and sought unification with the great Russian
people. The language question was definitively resolved
when the government, after the Polish uprising, introduced
the Russian language as obligatory in the Jewish schools of Lithuania.</p>
    <p>After that, they moved on to the subjects of instruction
and pursued the same tendency of Russification.
Thus, the curriculum of Jewish subjects was gradually
reduced in favor of “general,” i.e.,
Russian education. It went so far that in girls’ schools,
Hebrew writing instruction was <em class="gesperrt">forbidden</em>.
— In this respect, too, the government’s tendency
corresponded to the silent wish of the young generation
and, above all, that of the Jewish teachers, that general
education should be given preference. These teachers ultimately
pushed Judaism out of Jewish schools as well.</p>
    <p>So it was no wonder that when the dark, cold, stormy
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[182]" id="pgepubid00191"><a id="Seite_182" title="[182]"/></span>
period of the eighties and nineties broke upon us Jews,
and our children in their shaky, fragile
little boat were caught by the high tide and
tossed up and down by the roaring waves of life,
— that they wanted to bring their little boat to safety.</p>
    <p>This safe harbor was — baptism.</p>
    <p>That’s what they believed then.</p>
    <p>Then it fell, the meaningful, heavy, terrible
word, which like a plague reached into the heart of Judaism
and tore loved ones apart. Only very rarely
did this word pass my lips, because it touched me too deeply,
cut too deeply into my bleeding mother’s heart…</p>
    <p>After the terrible thing had happened, I did not speak of it
even with those closest to me.</p>
    <p>Only to my pages have I entrusted it, moistened with tears
and preserved deep, deep in memory —
until today.</p>
    <p>But today I want to overcome myself, today I want
to tell of that dark night… And like everything I
experience, this intention, this
task, forms itself into an image for me: I see myself as the little grandmother
sitting by the fireplace — and around me
the youth of today. They love to listen to me when
I tell of the old bygone times of Jewish life.
Their eyes grow wider, they shine, the
children proudly raise their heads and listen. Oh, miracle
of blood! The children whose parents turned away from Judaism
are returning to it. They long
for it and for the old great Jewish melody,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[183]" id="pgepubid00192"><a id="Seite_183" title="[183]"/></span>
which they have never heard. All this I read in the clever eyes
of the children, and to them I want to open my wounded heart and
tell of all the suffering and horrors of that night…</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>Between this modern school, whose leaders convinced
and systematically alienated children from Judaism,
and the large mass of the orthodox Jewish
population, there was a very hostile relationship. One
will understand that. The Hebrew language should not
be faithlessly abandoned. All permitted and unpermitted
means had to be used to enable Hebrew instruction.
Punishment and fines — it didn’t matter, as long as
the goal was achieved. The elders did not want to surrender
so easily. The Chedarim continued,
the much-mocked Melamdim continued to “drill” their students.
And even if the government interfered;
how pathetic was this tutelage against the holy
zeal of the pious! Even if the higher Talmudic schools
— the Yeshivot — were under the control of the
Ministry of Public Education, the supervision remained
only theoretical. Government power did not penetrate into the
quiet of the synagogues. Little could be achieved with coercion.
Finally, the government yielded. Not least,
when in 1863 the Society for the Promotion
of Education among Russian Jews was formed and,
after overcoming a period of storm and stress, with conciliatory
love and understanding for the value of tradition,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[184]" id="pgepubid00193"><a id="Seite_184" title="[184]"/></span>
carried out its quiet but persistent work.
Of course, it found powerful support in the spirit of the times.
The wealthy classes sent their children only to the
Crown school. The Cheder remained essentially only for the children
of the proletariat. But even among the rich,
the study of the Hebrew language was not
neglected in the long run. The Melamed came to the house
for a few hours a week. Gymnasium and university: these
were now the goals. And it was already a striking
exception when a rich man sent his talented son to a
Yeshiva.</p>
    <p>In these years of inner transformation, in the period
of the 1870s, all sorts of winged words emerged in Russia,
such as Nihilism, Materialism, Assimilation,
Antisemitism, Decadence. They dominated the last
quarter of the 19th century and kept both Jewish
and non-Jewish youth in Russia in an unstoppable
movement, in <em class="gesperrt">one</em> agitation. The
novel: “Fathers and Sons” by Turgenev appeared, in which the
word Nihilism was first coined. The enthusiastic youth
subsequently found in the hero of this novel the echo of their
views and aspirations, and they supplemented and
shaped what was still missing, following the example of Bazarov.
The struggle with parents became increasingly ruthless and
bitter. More and more, Jewish
youth distanced themselves from their parents. Indeed, it was not uncommon for
children to be ashamed of them. In their own parents, they often
saw nothing more than the purse that had to provide them with the
means to satisfy their desires.
Respect parents? Why? One can only respect
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[185]" id="pgepubid00194"><a id="Seite_185" title="[185]"/></span>
those who are superior in education. The devotion, gratitude,
piety of earlier times had disappeared without a trace from Jewish
life, as if they had never been the pride
and glory of the Jewish home. In their eagerness
to overthrow the old, to skeptically examine everything existing,
to criticize, to assert their own individuality, the
young generation knew no bounds, and it was not uncommon
for such a philosopher (girls not excluded),
equipped with all the maxims of Franz Moor,
to dare to reproach their parents for their birth
if life did not go their way.
Such a being of the latest formation, for example, graciously stated:
“If I see that my mother and a
stranger are simultaneously in danger, I will save
my mother first!” — As if it could be otherwise.
— This is a small proof of how far the youth
of the eighties and nineties were removed from natural feeling,
that they believed they first had to prove what
should be so self-evident, what lies in the blood and has become
instinct.</p>
    <p>If I had described the scenes between parents and children of the
1840s and 1850s as tragicomic,
then the occurrences in many Jewish families
of the 1880s and 1890s were purely tragic.</p>
    <p>Jewish youth lost themselves in foreign ways. Assimilation
to the core was their motto. In Jewish
life, everything was in disarray; a true
“Tohu vaVohu” reigned. But the spirit of G-d did not hover over
the surface.</p>
    <p>That was the general mood and condition
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[186]" id="pgepubid00195"><a id="Seite_186" title="[186]"/></span>
of Jewish youth when the dark, cold, stormy
period broke upon their lives and their destiny —</p>
    <p>“Vayehi Hayom”! And it was a day on March 1, 1881,
on which the sun, which had risen over Jewish life
in the 1850s, suddenly extinguished: Alexander II
was shot on the bank of the Moika Canal in St. Petersburg!
The hand that had signed the act of liberation for sixty
million serfs became stiff. The
mouth that had spoken the great word of liberation
was silenced forever. And the salvation expected by the people
receded into the far, far distance.</p>
    <p>In a session, the Minsk City Duma had decided
to send two men from among them as delegates to Petersburg
to lay a wreath on the fresh grave of the humane
Emperor there.</p>
    <p>The mayor of the city, H. Golinevich,
and my husband were chosen; the community drew up a power of attorney with
the signatures of all members, and they departed.</p>
    <p>It was the first time that Jews participated in such a
mourning demonstration.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>And other times came — other songs resounded
— The brood of vipers, which until then
had not dared to come into the light of day, now crawled out of the
swamps: antisemitism broke out and pushed
the Jews back into the ghetto. Without much ado,
the gates of education were closed to them. The jubilation of the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[187]" id="pgepubid00196"><a id="Seite_187" title="[187]"/></span>
1850s and 1860s turned into “Kinot”<a id="FNanchor_38_38"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_38_38">[38]</a>, the hopes
for the future into the lamentations of Jeremiah —</p>
    <p>The Jews were deprived of the last remnants of their previous freedoms.
Restrictions upon restrictions,
which continue with temporary tightenings and relaxations
to this day, and whose end is not in sight.
The right of residence for Jews was increasingly restricted.
Residence in Petersburg and other cities of Russia
was completely forbidden or only permitted to certain categories of
Jews, e.g., merchants of the first guild, who had to pay a very high fee
to the government for this, and those who had acquired an academic diploma
in Russia.</p>
    <p>Academic education itself, however, became increasingly difficult
for Jews, as only a small number were admitted
to gymnasiums, and the
few who, despite all obstacles, had then completed gymnasium,
were again sifted through when enrolling in universities.
It is understandable that these hardships
had to lead to severe corruption among Jews and Russians.
All conceivable means were employed by Jews
to enable their children to enter gymnasiums and universities
and to circumvent the brutal laws.
It even went so far later that Jewish
parents paid the school fees for impoverished Christian children,
just to increase the number of Christian students
and then still be able to get their own children into school.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[188]" id="pgepubid00197"><a id="Seite_188" title="[188]"/></span>
For only a certain percentage of Jews were allowed to be admitted.</p>
    <p>Money and patronage combined played the largest, indeed often
the sole role in the decision regarding the
admission of Jewish students. What demoralization these conditions
had in their wake, even among small children,
is easy to imagine. Often, the little candidates
would ask each other at the beginning of the exams: “How much is
your father giving...?” And what bitterness this must have brought
into the hearts of the children, that the rich could still
achieve many things for themselves, while the poor
had to stand back entirely. — Money was the right!</p>
    <p>And if, after endless efforts, it had finally been possible
to bring a Jewish boy to the matriculation examination,
and if he had even passed it with the highest distinction,
he was still by no means
certain to be admitted to university.
Again, the “percentage norm” came into effect. Since the
number of Jewish students was again dependent
on that of non-Jewish students, many, many Jews
had to be left behind upon entering the university.
And the choice of profession was and is for the
Jewish youth in Russia not a question of inclination
and ability or the intentions of the parents, but solely
of blind chance, which admits a few and
excludes most without choice and without consideration.
For no other reason than because they are Jews.</p>
    <p>As in school, so in life.</p>
    <p>The atmosphere around the Jews became gloomy and heavy with storms.
They were mocked and persecuted at every turn, even by
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[189]" id="pgepubid00198"><a id="Seite_189" title="[189]"/></span>
the lowest stratum of the population.
Thus, I recall an episode characteristic of those times,
which my husband experienced in Minsk. As he
once got caught in a crowd on the street, he suddenly heard
a short command next to him: “Jew, get out of the way!”
He turned around and saw a Russian, from whose
features the poison of hatred flowed. The street was swarming
with Jews. Then my husband unequivocally raised his
walking stick and loudly called out to the antisemite: “What makes
you think you can speak so contemptuously; the street is
free for everyone —!” In an instant, he was
surrounded by Jews who, in their rage, immediately wanted to take revenge
on this man. However, the antisemite quickly
fled.</p>
    <p>Some days after this incident, Governor Petrov sent for my husband and greeted him with the following words: “As I hear, you are more of a commander in the city than I am myself. Perhaps you want to take over my post altogether?” My husband politely thanked him and assured the governor proudly and with noble composure that he was very satisfied with <em class="gesperrt">his</em> position as director of the Commercial Bank and desired no other.</p>
    <p>Only my husband’s high position and his connections within the bureaucracy prevented a bad outcome of this incident. Anyone else would have paid dearly for it.</p>
    <p>Such and similar episodes repeated themselves more and more frequently. They were the harbingers of those bloody events that were not long in coming.</p>
    <p>And “pogrom” was the new word that the eighties
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[190]" id="pgepubid00199"><a id="Seite_190" title="[190]"/></span>
years had coined… The Jews of Kiev, Romny, Konotop, and other places were the first to experience the terrible; they were the first to be defenselessly attacked by the wild masses of the local rabble and slaughtered in the crudest manner. The newspapers, but mainly private letters, brought detailed news of what had happened and spread incredible panic —</p>
    <p>That was the beginning… A manifold echo resounded from all ends of Russia. Among the Jews, despondency and despair reigned.</p>
    <p>However, they did not remain long in this desolate rigidity and gathered all their strength to defend themselves against the enemy. They realized that G-d would only help them if they helped themselves — and they took measures and made preparations for the future, undaunted, courageous, remembering the words from “Megilath Ester”: “Kaasher — ovadeti, ovodeti” — “Anyway, we are lost, so let’s defend ourselves!”</p>
    <p>A somber mood prevailed in the city of Minsk. Trade stagnated. The Jews left their businesses. One saw them hurrying through the streets, hastily, restlessly, casting suspicious glances around them. They were on their guard and would have fought desperately in the event of a pogrom. The air was charged. An explosion was expected at any moment.</p>
    <p>The Jewish market women who came to my house told with horror and dread of the brutalities and threats of the peasants who brought their goods to the Minsk market twice a week. The peasants spoke
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[191]" id="pgepubid00200"><a id="Seite_191" title="[191]"/></span>
publicly of an imminent attack and the murder of all Jews.</p>
    <p>My husband also brought dreadful news from his bank, the children from school. The anti-Jewish sentiment grew with each day. And it came to the point that even small street urchins dared to smash the windowpanes of the most respected families in Minsk with stones and shout contemptuous words and insults at the Jews.</p>
    <p>Once, there was a loud knock at the entrance door of our apartment, which was on the ground floor. The girl opened the door and saw a small street boy in front of her, astonished. Boldly, with an impudent, defiant expression, without taking off his cap, he asked for the name of the residents. When the girl told him our Russian-sounding surname and our Russian first name, he impatiently repeated his question: “I want to know if Jews or Christians live here!” After receiving the desired answer, he angrily shouted into the apartment: “Jewish scum, well, why are you showing off with Russian names —” and ran off.</p>
    <p>In all strata of the population, hatred against the Jews smoldered; they moved under hostile, hateful glances as if under sharpened knives.</p>
    <p>The Jews in Minsk prepared for battle and their houses became war tents. Each in his own way, as was easiest for him: one procured strong sticks — called “Drongi” —, the other mixed sand and tobacco to throw this stuff into the eyes of the pogrom rabble.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[192]" id="pgepubid00201"><a id="Seite_192" title="[192]"/></span>
Boys of eight, girls of ten took part in the terrible preparations, “were brave, undaunted on the streets.” It happened that such a hero called out to his worried mother: “Be calm, if the Kazappes come to kill us, I also have a knife!” With these words, he reached into his pocket and pulled out his small knife, which he had bought for ten kopecks.</p>
    <p>One no longer felt safe in one’s own home. The Christian servants, who had been in our service for a long time, suddenly became impolite and defiant, so that we were forced to secure ourselves against these household enemies. Every evening, after the servants had gone to rest, I took all the knives and hammers from the kitchen and locked them in a cupboard in my bedroom, and without the servants noticing, every night I erected a barricade of kitchen benches, chairs, a ladder, and other pieces of furniture in front of the entrance door. I smiled wistfully, for I did not believe that we could defend and save ourselves in this way in the event of a pogrom. Yet I built this barricade anew every time, and early in the morning I was the first to get up to put everything back in order, so that the servants would not notice our fear.</p>
    <p>However, a pogrom did not occur in Minsk. This city was spared by chance, or perhaps not by chance.</p>
    <p>Thus, in those eighties, when antisemitism raged throughout Russia, there were only two paths for a Jew: either to renounce everything that had already become
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[193]" id="pgepubid00202"><a id="Seite_193" title="[193]"/></span>
indispensable to him, in the name of Judaism — or freedom and all possibilities, such as education, career, i.e., baptism. — And hundreds of the enlightened Jews chose the latter path. But the Meshumodim of that time were not converts out of defiance (l’hachis); nor were they, like the Marranos of earlier times who held their services in cellars, these Meshumodim were deniers of all things religious — they were nihilists —.</p>
    <p>— Let the greatest Tzaddik come and say that he would have the courage and the right to demand of a young person, who grew up without any tradition, far from Judaism, that he should renounce everything that the future could offer him, in the name of this unknown and empty concept, renounce happiness, honor, name. To demand that he resist these temptations and withdraw into the darkness and narrowness of a provincial town and lead a miserable existence. Let him say whether he would have the right and the courage to do so, because <em class="gesperrt">I did not have it</em>!</p>
    <p>And so my children also went the way that so many others went. The first to leave us was Simon.</p>
    <p>When we learned of it, my husband wrote only the following words to our child: “It is not good to leave the camp of the defeated.”</p>
    <p>My beloved child Wolodia, who is no longer among the living, followed his example. After brilliantly passing his matriculation examination in Minsk, he traveled to St. Petersburg to begin his studies at the university there. He appeared at the university chancellery and presented his papers to the official who was to decide on admission.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[194]" id="pgepubid00203">
        <a id="Seite_194" title="[194]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>Great restrictions were in force for Jews. Only those who had received a gold medal in their final examination were admitted, and even of these, not all, but only up to ten percent of the total number of students. The official returned my son’s papers with the harsh words: “These are not your papers!” When my son looked at him in astonishment, he added confirmingly: “You must have stolen them somewhere; you are a Jew, and your certificates do not list a Jewish name, but a Russian name &gt;Vladimir&lt;.” On that very same day, the deeply offended young man, his dignity wounded, had to leave St. Petersburg, for as a Jew, he was not allowed to remain there for twenty-four hours without being a student. The boy had to travel to Petersburg several more times on this matter, always with the same result, until he took the fateful step — and was immediately enrolled in the list of students. And similarly, it happened to some other children as well.</p>
    <p>The baptism of my children was the heaviest blow I suffered in my life. But a loving mother’s heart can endure so much — I forgave and placed the blame on us parents.</p>
    <p>Gradually, this suffering lost its significance as a personal experience for me; it increasingly became a national tragedy. I mourned not only as a mother, but also as a Jewess, for the entire Jewish people, who lost so many noble forces.</p>
    <p>But not all enlightened Jews went astray to strangers in that dark period — there were many among them who found their way back to Judaism and who united under the influence of recent events.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[195]" id="pgepubid00204"><a id="Seite_195" title="[195]"/></span>
Yes, in reaction to antisemitism, the society of “Chovevei Zion” (Friends of Palestine) was founded by Dr. Pinsker, Dr. Lilienblum, and others.</p>
    <p>After the recent events, my husband was long dejected, withered, and it was only when an opportunity arose for him to put his energies at the service of the Jewish people that a spirit of joyful creation came over him anew.</p>
    <p>In the last quarter of the 19th century, the labor question began to come to the forefront in Russia and gradually gained importance and interest.</p>
    <p>Among Jews, for centuries, the working class, which largely consisted of the uneducated, was considered a lower class, and it is no wonder that it was little esteemed by a people who highly honor education, among whom intellectual aristocracy is everything. Sayings such as: “He understands &gt;Chumash&lt; (the 5 Books of Moses) like a shoemaker, like a tailor,” etc., have become common and were very often used. It is still not uncommon today in Jewish families for the father not to want to consent to the marriage of his daughter or son if he learns that there are tailors or shoemakers in the family. Despite all modern ideas, “Yichus”<a id="FNanchor_39_39"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#Footnote_39_39">[39]</a> still means a great deal to the large majority of even enlightened Jews.</p>
    <p>Now a bright ray penetrated the darkness, into the dull, dark dwellings of this third estate, awakening even these backward ones to a new, more beautiful life. A spiritual fermentation also began among them.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[196]" id="pgepubid00205">
        <a id="Seite_196" title="[196]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>The wealthy, aristocratic Jewry met these tendencies of the proletariat and spared no effort or money to support its endeavors.</p>
    <p>The new ideas were enthusiastically received in our house, and my husband conceived the plan to establish a three-class vocational school for boys in Minsk. No sooner said than done! “Omer v’oseh,” as the Hebrew says.</p>
    <p>He enlisted Rabbi Chaneles’s cooperation and asked the Jewish community to contribute a certain sum of money from the tax on kosher meat to the enterprise. The remaining necessary money was to be raised by members through monthly contributions.</p>
    <p>With what zeal my husband went to work! Every free hour he now dedicated to the “holy cause.” In this school, the following trades were initially to be taught: locksmithing, carpentry, blacksmithing. In addition, instruction in elementary subjects was also to be given, corresponding to the curriculum of public schools.</p>
    <p>A house was rented and furnished with the essentials. To his great joy, my husband succeeded in obtaining the inventory very cheaply and often for free.</p>
    <p>The Jewish population of Minsk was very satisfied. Each of the wealthy Jews declared themselves ready to promote the good work with a monetary gift. Not without reason did our sages already say: “Yisrael rachmanim bnei rachmanim” — “The children of Israel are merciful and children of the merciful.”</p>
    <p>A board was elected from among the progressive, distinguished
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[197]" id="pgepubid00206"><a id="Seite_197" title="[197]"/></span>
Jews of the city, who appointed my husband as chairman.</p>
    <p>Everything was ready, and the admission of children began. Orphans and children of very poor parents were given preference. Over sixty boys were accepted.</p>
    <p>Boarding schools were set up for the very poor and homeless; at first, the children ate with the citizens of the city — every day they were housed with different people. But with time, means were found to hire a cook, and the poor children received three meals a day at the school. On weekdays, the meals were very simple, yet fresh and healthy — soup, a piece of soup meat, groats. But on Friday evening and on the Sabbath, the table was festively set, and the children received a truly Jewish traditional meal. On the Sabbath, no work was done. It was a holiday on which the boys also prayed in their synagogue.</p>
    <p>These pupils, mostly cellar dwellers, were thin, pale children, with large, intelligent, black eyes. They were, of course, poorly dressed. But they worked and learned with pleasure. I often came to the school to enjoy the sight of the working children.</p>
    <p>Not a day passed without my husband visiting the school and staying there for at least an hour. Rabbi Chaneles was very much involved with this institution and personally taught the children the Bible and other subjects free of charge.</p>
    <p>Thus a year passed. The school had good successes. My husband and Rabbi Chaneles organized an
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[198]" id="pgepubid00207"><a id="Seite_198" title="[198]"/></span>
official event to present the annual report on their activities.</p>
    <p>Governor Petrov and several government officials, the directress of the girls’ gymnasium, Madame Buturlina, and the teachers of the upper classes, as well as the most distinguished ladies and gentlemen of Jewish society, were invited to this celebration.</p>
    <p>My husband read the report, and the entire company followed his explanations with true interest. It happened for the first time that in the premises of a <em class="gesperrt">Jewish</em> school, Jews and Christians harmoniously and solemnly discussed the affairs of the growing Jewish proletariat.</p>
    <p>In the large carpentry workshop, the pupils — boys aged 11-13 — were gathered; their miserable appearance aroused the warmest pity in the guests.</p>
    <p>When the official part of the event was over, I turned to the rich ladies and told them that it was our sacred duty to provide for the daily bread and appropriate clothing for these poor boys. My appeal had the desired success.</p>
    <p>The next day, I invited some ladies to my home, and we discussed our project. First and foremost, we formed a ladies’ association; furthermore, we sent several hundred letters to Jewish ladies with the request to join our association. We also asked them for new or used linen and clothing, as well as small monetary donations for our cause.</p>
    <p>Already in the next few days, entire shipments of
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[199]" id="pgepubid00208"><a id="Seite_199" title="[199]"/></span>
clothing arrived. With the money we received for this purpose, I bought the children woolen gloves and so-called “Bashliki” — hoods. Everything that was in the way of fabrics in my house was gathered, and my children’s nanny sat at the sewing machine for several days making the Bashliki. I felt true joy when I met the children in warm caps and gloves during my walk. By these hoods, the people recognized the members of this school, which was initially called “Wengeroff’s Workshop.”</p>
    <p>The members’ contributions arrived punctually in the school’s treasury, and we now had the opportunity to provide the children not only with meals at school but also with new, solid clothing made of gray, strong cotton fabric.</p>
    <p>It was a great satisfaction for my husband when several generations of apprentices who had left the school with a diploma were praised and recognized as good craftsmen wherever they were employed. These first craftsmen dispersed throughout the country; many went from Lithuania to Great Russia, where they received the right of residence as craftsmen. They were the first Jewish craftsmen in the northwestern settlement region who had received systematic training both in their trade and in the Bible and elementary subjects such as reading, writing, and arithmetic.</p>
    <p>The times were still so recent when the apprentice craftsman primarily had to serve his master as a house servant and starved and suffered for years until he learned something of the trade. Now, in healthy
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[200]" id="pgepubid00209"><a id="Seite_200" title="[200]"/></span>
conditions, he could calmly and systematically develop into a good worker.</p>
    <p>Under such favorable conditions, the children flourished. They learned diligently and made great progress.</p>
    <p>Unfortunately, the budget was not sufficient. Our ladies’ association decided to attract contributions from the citizens of Minsk in a pleasant way and organized an autumn festival, in which many non-Jews, even the governor, participated. The festival brought us between two and three thousand rubles, and since then, we have organized these festivals anew every autumn, always with great success. However, we always needed more money for our purposes, and not infrequently, my husband covered the deficit from his own pocket.</p>
    <p>Thus, the school had existed for about eight years under my husband’s leadership. A successful dance evening brought over three thousand rubles into the ladies’ association’s treasury. At the next meeting, my husband proposed taking out a loan from this treasury, as the main treasury was empty — this proposal met with opposition. My husband, offended by this, resigned from the presidency. It was a blow for both my husband and me — an important part of our lives was stolen from us.</p>
    <p>But, thank G-d, the school prospered even without us; it developed with each year and exists to this day.</p>
    <p>During this time, a great misfortune befell the city. A fire broke out, causing more than two million rubles in damage. Our apartment, along with all furniture and new cabinets, full of precious clothes and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[201]" id="pgepubid00210"><a id="Seite_201" title="[201]"/></span>
furs, was destroyed. We were glad to escape with our lives. Through flames and smoke, we made our way with the children to a remote part of the city where our friends lived, who hospitably took us in. The terror of that night shook me greatly. I became very ill and had to travel abroad for a cure. I took the children to Vienna with me.</p>
    <p>The vocational school had suffered little from this fire.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>I returned to Minsk only after three years. We moved into our own home, which my husband had had built in our absence. I brought entirely new furnishings from Vienna; and our house looked elegant and cozy. Our life became very pleasant.</p>
    <p>Not long after my return, a Mrs. Kaplan came to me, a very clever lady, a “Gabbete,” who had great understanding for the plight of the Jewish people and also a strong urge to alleviate this plight. She proposed to me the founding of a vocational school for girls, a plan which I enthusiastically embraced. I gratefully shook her hand, and with that, our pact was sealed.</p>
    <p>And from that moment on, I felt how my life once again gained meaning, a more intense, I would say, religious coloring.</p>
    <p>We immediately set to work. In the next few days,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[202]" id="pgepubid00211"><a id="Seite_202" title="[202]"/></span>
Mrs. Kaplan rented an apartment for the school. We then selected a ladies’ committee of young women and, just as with the founding of the boys’ school, turned to the Jewish citizens of Minsk with the request to participate in this cause with contributions. For the initial expenses, however, I organized an amateur theater performance. The proceeds brought in about half of the necessary sum.</p>
    <p>And now, every day, the inhabitants of the attics and cellars of the most remote parts of the city brought us their eight- to ten-year-old daughters and asked for them to be admitted to the school. We bought three sewing machines on installment, hired a seamstress with a salary of twenty rubles monthly, a lingerie seamstress with ten rubles monthly, and a corset and bodice seamstress with the same salary. We bought several hundred meters of the simplest calico, all necessary sewing supplies, some flat irons, scissors, etc.</p>
    <p>The day on which we were to open this modest institution drew near. We all gathered at the appointed hour in the schoolrooms. Mrs. Kaplan, who herself had learned tailoring for several years in Königsberg, cut several individual pieces from a large piece of fabric and distributed them among the assembled girls, and instruction in the three classes began.</p>
    <p>It was not long before several ladies and young girls came to us and offered their services. The young girls gave the children free instruction in the Russian language and arithmetic; a Melamed for instruction in Hebrew was also
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[203]" id="pgepubid00212"><a id="Seite_203" title="[203]"/></span>
engaged by us, who taught daily, while the lessons in the Russian language took place only twice a week.</p>
    <p>But the neglected, wild appearance of our protégées gave us no peace, and our next wish, to see them decently dressed, soon came true.</p>
    <p>After a short time, we had the satisfaction and joy of seeing our sixty girls, clean, with short-cut hair, in simple, clean dresses and aprons, diligently engaged in their work.</p>
    <p>At my suggestion, these children of the people were taught the pithy, practical rules of life of our sages: “Pirkei Avot” (Sayings of the Fathers).</p>
    <p>I was often present at these lectures, and it gave me great joy to see with what interest and understanding the children followed these explanations.</p>
    <p>Thanks to the warm participation of the citizens of Minsk, who supported our school fund with donations and contributions, we were soon able to provide not only for the girls’ education but also for the nourishment of these poor, hungry beings.</p>
    <p>The children learned very quickly and soon made useful garments. Within a year, they progressed to the point where distinguished Jewish and Christian ladies had their outfits made in our workshop.</p>
    <p>In the autumn of the first year, we organized a festival for the benefit of our school, which brought us two thousand rubles. The festivals became a permanent institution and continue to this day.</p>
    <p>Both vocational schools, the one for boys and the one for
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[204]" id="pgepubid00213"><a id="Seite_204" title="[204]"/></span>
girls, existed for a long time without any privileges and rights. However, with time, we succeeded in obtaining certain rights for both schools from the Ministry of Public Education, such as the right of residence in Great Russia. The certificate that the craftsman received after completing school gave him the right to practice his trade throughout Russia. I myself passed a white seamstress’s examination when, years later, I wanted to obtain the right of residence in Kiev.</p>
    <p>From now on, our Minsk schools were under the protection and supervision of the Directorate of Public Education. The government patronized these schools from the beginning because, by introducing the Russian language of instruction, it could also promote its Russifying tendencies here.</p>
    <p>Ten years after the founding of the girls’ school, we organized an exhibition of objects made by our students. The most distinguished public of the city, Jews and Christians, gathered, and even the governor, Prince Trubetskoy, honored us with his presence. — It was another beautiful day in my life!</p>
    <p>The girls, recently impoverished, miserable, wild children, now stood in the festively decorated exhibition room, adorned, clean, healthy, and surrounded by the highest and most distinguished people of the city, who admired and praised their work.</p>
    <p>Our school gave the poor and disadvantaged the opportunity to earn their bread honestly and decently; it gave them health, freshness, youth, and above all, human rights. Perhaps the great
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[205]" id="pgepubid00214"><a id="Seite_205" title="[205]"/></span>
day will soon come again when the Jewish “Bal meloches,” working people, will stand on equal footing with the scholars of the nation. As in the times of our Tanaïm and Amoraïm, when Rabbi Jochanan was a shoemaker, Rabbi Yitzchak and R. Yehuda were blacksmiths, R. Joseph a carpenter, R. Shimon a weaver, R. Hillel a woodcutter, R. Hunna a water carrier, R. Yichah a charcoal burner, R. Jose and R. Chanina shoemenders in the public market, R. Nehunja a well-digger. Their craft did not prevent them from giving Talmudic lectures...</p>
    <p>With tears in my eyes, I saw our Jewish children, and a quiet joy was within me, for I knew at that moment that G-d had blessed our effort and work.</p>
    <p>Despite the large donations, the monthly contributions of our members, and the proceeds from festivals, our funds were insufficient, and we operated at a deficit. Then news reached us that Baron Hirsch had bequeathed several million rubles in his will for the vocational schools of Russian Jews. — It sounded like a fairy tale. But soon it became a reality. An authorized representative of the Main College of Trustees came to us from Petersburg, and after completing certain formalities, both schools received permanent support — each several thousand rubles annually —, which is paid to this day.</p>
    <p>Years later, I sometimes met unfamiliar young girls in the street who greeted me with particular kindness and addressed me by my name. When I then, somewhat surprised, asked them for their names, I received the answer: “Madame Wengeroff, I am Rivke or Malke, etc., from the workshop —,” and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[206]" id="pgepubid00215"><a id="Seite_206" title="[206]"/></span>
it took me a good while to recognize the small, ragged, miserable Rivkele in the almost prosperous-looking girl!</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>The process of Europeanization of the Jewish-Russian masses, however much it destroyed the old structure of the ghetto and brought about complete disruption among the weak and defenseless, is essentially to be regarded only as a process of transformation. How could it be otherwise! A spirit that for centuries had been subjected to the strict discipline of the Talmud, that strived beyond everyday life for a higher law, that had practiced with utmost tension to distinguish between right and wrong; an emotional life that had expressed itself in gentle, transfigured, and thoughtful customs and had found its recreation from the harshness of everyday life in the quiet gardens of the Haggadah —: the richness of these psychological values could not possibly be simply buried by the new education. Culture inherent in the blood, refined and cultivated over centuries, sought and found a new field for its activity, a new home in art. Of course, only a few became sculptors of strong quality. But the thousands and tens of thousands of young writers who pushed into the light around the 1860s, the many sensitive souls, empathizers, and connoisseurs of all of Europe’s artistic creations always proved only one thing: that the area of most personal, passionate interest had indeed changed; but that the spiritual impulses were the same as they had been for centuries. Whoever
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[207]" id="pgepubid00216"><a id="Seite_207" title="[207]"/></span>
sees things in this light will no longer view phenomena like Antokolski as miracles. There were always artists in the ghetto. But spiritual freedom had to come to unleash the creative will, to loosen the gags from their hands. Antokolski was the son of a poor tavern keeper from the suburb of Antokol near Vilna. His unusual talent was noticed early on. He carved wooden figures, made seals whose handles depicted various shapes. Even as a small boy, he carved the full figure of Governor-General Nazimov into an amber brooch, which was strikingly similar, although the boy had only seen the governor fleetingly from a distance a few times. A wood carving depicting the surprise of a Marrano family in a cellar during the Seder evening caused a sensation. The entire tragedy of this situation was captured. The table was overturned, the Haggadahs, the dishes, the candlesticks, the candles, wine bottles all thrown together in disarray. In a corner, the men stood pressed together. A woman leaned against a wall, holding an infant in her arms. One felt that she did not dare to breathe.</p>
    <p>It was clear that this unusual talent would wither in the ghetto, as so many had withered there. Then a Mr. Gerstein in Vilna took the young man under his wing and, as he grew up, provided him with the opportunity to go to Petersburg. That was a long journey on a ladder wagon. Bread and herring were the youth’s only food. In Petersburg, the famous writer Turgenev noticed him,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[208]" id="pgepubid00217"><a id="Seite_208" title="[208]"/></span>
who elevated him, provided him with the education of his time, and paved his way to the influential men of the city. I had the great fortune to meet the young master when he was working on his monumental work, Ivan Grozny, Ivan the Terrible. Due to the scope of the work, Antokolski had applied to the academic council for a larger studio. But he was only assigned an attic room on the third floor, which could only be reached by a narrow back staircase. He had to make do with the poorly lit, low room. But the work grew and grew. And everyone who saw it developing was enthusiastic. Even today, I recall the almost passionate excitement that seized me at the sight of this work. My brother-in-law Sack, who was friends with Antokolski, had enabled my access to his studio. The work was still in clay model form. But to me, it was as if I stood not before a lifeless creation, but before life itself. Behind the stern forehead, one could see great thoughts forming, relentlessly steering towards a goal. Both arms were resting on the armrests of the chair, so that one believed Ivan must now spring up; the Bible, lying on his knees, would slide down, and soon his powerful hand would raise the Palitsa, the eagle-adorned staff, and drive its iron tip through the boot and foot of an Oprichnik (guardsman).</p>
    <p>It was, in any case, the most monumental work that sculpture in Russia had produced. It was spoken of in all societies, until finally the rumor of this work reached Emperor Alexander II. He, too, wanted to see it. Then terror struck the bones of the professorial bunglers.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[209]" id="pgepubid00218"><a id="Seite_209" title="[209]"/></span>
They asked the young artist to have the model moved to a larger room. For they feared the Emperor might suspect how narrowly they had treated the young artist. Antokolski refused. Allegedly, because he did not want to endanger his model. It could be damaged on the narrow staircase. But his artist’s pride also bristled. The Emperor should indeed see that greatness could grow even in humble surroundings. So the staircase was hastily covered with real carpets and decorated with exotic plants. The Emperor, though feeling uncomfortable on these labyrinthine paths, whose exit was not clearly visible, was captivated by the work when he entered the artist’s attic studio. He shook the artist’s hand, praised him, and thanked him. Soon thereafter, Antokolski received the title of Professor.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>The number of performing artists was considerably larger. Music was always popular in the ghetto. Although the Klezmorim could not play from notes, they poured their entire soul into their rough, wild playing. And they knew how to move people. The Chazonim had also never studied music. Yet their unregulated singing, interpreting the meaning of the prayer words down to the last subtleties, provided consecration, devotion, and — diversion. There wasn’t much variety in the ghetto. And a new Chazon — and there were those who traveled from town to town with their troupe — was an event. He also satisfied
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[210]" id="pgepubid00219"><a id="Seite_210" title="[210]"/></span>
those needs that operettas and concerts serve today. Even the Badchen, the troubadour of family festivities, who put the audience in the mood with his serious and humorous “Grammen” (rhymes/songs), was ultimately also an artist. If one traces the large number of performing musicians who now flood the whole world, and if one knows how to correctly identify the distorted names, one will find Klezmorim, Chazonim, Badchonim among the ancestors of most of them. I want to tell here about one who is now a music master at the Imperial Opera in Moscow. The story is simply typical.</p>
    <hr class="tb"/>
    <p>It was one afternoon when my friend N. Friedberg entered my study with two boys, the older of whom was seven, the younger six years old, and introduced them to me with the words: “These are the children of Badchen Fidelmann.” They were pale, thin boys who blinked at me with their coal-black eyes like rabbits. “I would like them to play for you. You want to hear them play, and I hope to gain your interest in them thereby.” “Good,” I said, “I will do my best.” Meanwhile, the older one quickly ran into the anteroom, brought the two small violins along with the music book, a schoolbook which contained only small Polish songs and dances that were well known to me. The older one screeched out one and then another of them for me; I listened to the familiar melodies and was glad when the playing was over. Now the younger one began to play with eagerness — his little eyes sparkling, his facial features
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[211]" id="pgepubid00220"><a id="Seite_211" title="[211]"/></span>
came alive, and I was moved as I followed the rapid movements of his small hand and observed his expressive little face. The audition was over. I told Mr. F. that my friends and I would vouch for the tuition fee — eight rubles monthly. Thus, the children were peacefully dismissed, to begin their lessons the very next day, which they had had to interrupt because the teacher demanded a higher fee. My friend F., himself an excellent musician, discovered talent in the younger boy. The boys, especially the smaller one, learned diligently. I took pleasure in it. Besides music, I had them taught the Bible, writing, and Russian by the Jewish Melamed. After they had had a year of lessons, my housemates, who at first always ran away, were happy to be present at the examinations. Even my husband began to take an interest in the little one’s playing.</p>
    <p>It often happened that the little one brought the basket of groceries to me in the kitchen, as his mother had no time to bring it herself on Friday. I scolded him for it, telling him not to dare drag the basket through the streets. “I hope to G-d,“ I said, “that you will become a great, famous man and ride in carriages, and I don’t want anyone to see you with your basket.“ He replied: “For you, Madame Wengeroff, I can do anything.“ Three years had passed. The little one had learned all that his teacher in music could offer him. Since there was no other in Minsk, I decided, together with Mr. F., to send him to Petersburg. I wrote to my sister,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[212]" id="pgepubid00221"><a id="Seite_212" title="[212]"/></span>
Her Excellency Sack, asking her to take care of the boy, about whom I had already told her during my stay in Petersburg.</p>
    <p>Money had to be raised for the journey and the initial period of his stay in Petersburg. We organized a concert, in which my protégé Ruwinke, later “Roman Alexandrovich,“ also performed. The concert had the desired success. Now we made arrangements for his departure.</p>
    <p>Various people contributed to his outfitting. He even received a silver watch from Mr. Syrkin, his second protector, which he was absolutely thrilled about.</p>
    <p>As he said goodbye, I admonished him to remember his old mother and all his benefactors with gratitude, even in his good fortune. I also asked him to report soon on his admission to the conservatory, to which he naively said: “Where will I get a stamp from?“ I gave him a ruble for stamps. — He did not use it for that purpose.</p>
    <p>Through the mediation of my sister and the intercession of Anton Rubinstein, he received a residence permit from Governor Grosser and free admission to the conservatory. He entered Professor Auer’s violin class and studied with the greatest success until he had to fulfill his military obligation. Before that, he had to pass a gymnasium examination so as not to serve as a simple soldier. During this preparation, the most distinguished students came to his aid; for his other living needs, Mrs. Sack and Mrs. Anna Tirk provided, in
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[213]" id="pgepubid00222"><a id="Seite_213" title="[213]"/></span>
whose homes he often played with great acclaim. He joined the most distinguished Guard Cuirassier Regiment and wore the picturesque uniform, the hat richly adorned with braids. He was allotted two rooms in the barracks and given a special servant. He was treated with consideration by his superiors and won the hearts of the authorities with his playing. To listen to his daily exercises, the highest dignitaries came, and if he felt like showing them his mood, he would refer them to the adjoining room.</p>
    <p class="pmb3">At the same time, a French orchestra visited Petersburg and gave its concerts at court; now it was time to send a Petersburg orchestra to Paris. Roman Alexandrovich was then accorded the honor of serving as the first violinist. Still in military service, in his splendid uniform, he played in the palace before President Carnot with great success and received a precious diamond ring from him. He completed his studies at the conservatory. During his military service, he gave concerts in Petersburg, Düsseldorf, and Berlin.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <div class="pmb3"/>
    <h2 id="pgepubid00223">
      <a id="Der_Tod_meines_Mannes">The Death of My Husband.</a>
    </h2>
    <p>Softly and treacherously, the specter of death crept towards our home. My husband felt worse day by day. He developed a heart condition, which the stress of business only ever worsened. He was not to remain among the living
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[214]" id="pgepubid00224"><a id="Seite_214" title="[214]"/></span>
for long. But at that time, I did not yet suspect <em class="gesperrt">how</em> near his end was.</p>
    <p>In the last years of his life, he became quiet, gentle, and succumbed to the mystical mood of his youth, as he delved into the teachings of the Kabbalah. I felt how he envied me for having preserved my believing spirit through all the storms of our life —</p>
    <p>Yet he still perceived these mystical stirrings as a weakness. And he was secretly ashamed of them. He now let me be and no longer mocked my religious views and actions. Indeed, it even happened that on holidays — he himself did not go to pray — he came to me in the synagogue, to, as he awkwardly apologized, check on me — However, his visits had a deeper cause: it was a compulsion of the soul that drove him to the house of prayer. The atmosphere of the solemnly gathered praying Jews attracted him.</p>
    <p>He wavered. He did not want to change the lifestyle he had once adopted. But the memories of his youth became ever more powerful, ever stronger, and bound him. The tradition that was in his blood was, after all, stronger than all modern Sturm und Drang...</p>
    <p>This inner turmoil became increasingly apparent, often quite suddenly. Once, we hosted a dinner to which sixty people were invited. My husband was in good spirits the whole time, conversed with everyone, and played the amiable host. It was late at night when the guests left our house. Suddenly, as if stirred by great pain, my husband
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[215]" id="pgepubid00225"><a id="Seite_215" title="[215]"/></span>
wrung his hands and cried: “Oh, sixty Jewish children sat together here and ate treif!“</p>
    <p>And so my mother’s prophecy was fulfilled! — This mood regained power over many men of that generation. For in the sacred hours, when they dared to reveal themselves, they felt the rift that ran through their souls. The intoxication faded, the memories of youth rubbed the sleep from their eyes and flatteringly demanded their right. The old captivated them. The new era beckoned.</p>
    <p>My husband became increasingly quiet and solitary. The only passion of his last years was the care of flowers, which he tended with paternal solicitude. In his leisure hours, he also enjoyed wood carving and copper engraving. But that was not good for his lungs.</p>
    <p>Until the last moment of his life, he represented the interests of his fellow tribesmen. His zeal knew no bounds when it came to helping them, to carrying out anything useful for them. My warnings and pleas were of no avail. He then worked without regard for the threatening state of his health. Every Jewish misfortune affected him as if it were his own. And an injustice that concerned others more than him ultimately caused his death.</p>
    <p>The mayor of the city of Minsk at that time was Count Czapski, a distinguished, educated man of truly European culture, whose sole aim was to Europeanize Minsk. Thus, he introduced the tram, had a magnificent slaughterhouse built, paved the streets, and so on. He spent hundreds of thousands of rubles for these purposes — not only from the
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[216]" id="pgepubid00226"><a id="Seite_216" title="[216]"/></span>
municipal funds, but he also contributed large sums from his own pocket. Personally, he was simple and frugal. His food and clothing were plain, indeed meager. However, Count Cz. did not account for the means of the citizenry, who were mostly poor people and could not bear the expenses, when carrying out his grand plans. The result of his zeal was a municipal debt of 200 000 rubles, and these, of course, were to be paid by the citizens. It was an excessively heavy burden, which was primarily imposed on the Jews. My husband considered it a matter of honor to fight against this demand.</p>
    <p>He prepared detailed statements of expenses for the past years, which were to support his arguments. Thus equipped, he went to the last session of the City Duma — of which he had been a member for 12 years. Despite my entreaties and desperate pleas!</p>
    <p>My husband gave a two-hour speech that made a strong impression. It was printed in the newspapers and was the talk of the town. But already the next day, he collapsed.</p>
    <p>On the third day — it was a Friday — my husband went to the bank for the last time, but soon returned and had our family doctor called. The doctor reassured us that it was only a temporary weakness. Although I already sensed the terrible truth, I gladly allowed myself to be deceived.</p>
    <p>My husband informed me that he had invited a business friend for dinner and asked me to prepare good Jewish fish. The evening passed very pleasantly; the children played piano and cello at Father’s request.
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[217]" id="pgepubid00227"><a id="Seite_217" title="[217]"/></span>
The elegant rooms were festively lit, and for the last time, a Sabbath atmosphere prevailed in our home.</p>
    <p>But my poor husband had no peace; he could not stay in his seat. He jumped up and walked hastily around the apartment.</p>
    <p>He looked at the playing children, at the beautiful rooms, and I noticed that amidst all his restlessness, a touch of happiness brushed across his flushed cheeks. — G-d had granted him one more joyful hour before his passing.</p>
    <p>The guest bade us farewell and invited me to come with the children to his home in Libau.</p>
    <p>My husband, accompanied by his servant, immediately went to his bedroom. The children went to bed. The house became quiet. Only I was still busy in the dining room.</p>
    <p>Suddenly, the bell from my husband’s room rang shrilly. — That was the bell announcing the coming storm that would destroy our entire life up to that point and scatter us forever —.</p>
    <p>I hurried into the bedroom and found my husband already greatly changed. The doctor came, prescribed medication, and comforted us as best he could. But he stayed with me at the bedside all night. My husband was restless, waking every moment from his slumber, and each time he saw me still awake by the bed, he asked me to go to rest: “Spare yourself, at least keep yourself healthy for the children...“</p>
    <p>In the morning, the patient felt considerably better and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[218]" id="pgepubid00228"><a id="Seite_218" title="[218]"/></span>
demanded to get up. He dressed, drank his tea, went to his study, read a book, and even gave instructions to a bank procurator.</p>
    <p>And again, hope crept into my desperate heart — but the fateful hour approached more and more. My husband began to complain anew. The restlessness within him reached its peak. Soon he sat, soon he lay down again, only to rise hastily after a moment. The clock struck six. — The most dreadful hour of my life. It was a Saturday, April 18, 1892. I was next to my husband, who had sat down on a sofa. Anxiously, I looked at his face, and with tormenting worry, I observed the slightest changes in his features. That agitated him, and he left my questions unanswered. I poured him tea onto the saucer, of which he took a sip.</p>
    <p>So we sat next to each other for about fifteen more minutes, when he suddenly opened his eyes wide with terror, drew heavy breaths through his mouth and nose, and threw his head back. His strength failed him. He fell back and lay motionless.</p>
    <p>It became completely silent — for a moment, that dreadful calm reigned in the room which arises when thousands of voices fall silent out of despair and boundless pain.</p>
    <p>Half mad, I threw myself sobbing over my
husband. I held his head in both hands. His
eyes were already closed. I loudly called his
name. My whole heart, my whole love, all our
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[219]" id="pgepubid00229"><a id="Seite_219" title="[219]"/></span>
dear memories I poured into this cry. I believed
it must awaken him once more. Once more his
eyes should rest on me, before he closed them forever.
And he looked up. But they were no longer the eyes
of my beloved husband. Blurred, lusterless, strange
was his gaze, as if it came from afar, from there perhaps,
whence one never returns.</p>
    <p>The next few hours I was unconscious. And then
— the awakening! An emptiness opened up before me, in which
all words of comfort and love from the children
and friends and relatives surrounding me faded away without the slightest echo in
my heart.</p>
    <p>Empty, empty, nameless empty lay life before me, which
I would have so gladly left at that hour, to go the other way
together with my dear, beloved one.
In that hour, I understood so well the Indian custom, according
to which the wife of the deceased is cremated together with him.</p>
    <p>Ten old Jews (a minyan) “Batlanim” performed
prayers three times a day at the corpse, and my blessed
Wolodia said “Kaddish”.</p>
    <p>On Monday, at twelve o’clock noon, the funeral
took place.</p>
    <p>A large crowd gathered around our
house. Many boys, who had been sent from the houses of prayer,
sang psalms at the corpse. Flower wreaths were brought,
but at my request, they were left behind in the house.</p>
    <p>My children and I — we tore our clothes
at the chest. They lifted the bier and carried him out
— the husband, the father, the master of this house.</p>
    <p class="pmb3 pmb2">At the cemetery, all who stood around the grave
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[220]" id="pgepubid00230"><a id="Seite_220" title="[220]"/></span>
said prayers. From the crowd, which included the most distinguished
Jews and Christians, the Maggid, the city preacher,
stepped forward and delivered a eulogy, which concluded with the
words: “Even if he neglected some Jewish customs in
his life, one must nevertheless loudly confess at
his grave: ‘That he was an Ohev Am Yisrael, that he loved his people Israel.’”</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[221]" id="pgepubid00231">
        <a id="Seite_221" title="[221]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p>Also published by the same publisher:<br/>
</p>
    <p class="p1 center font22 pmb1">Memoirs of a Grandmother.</p>
    <p class="center">
      <b>Pictures from the Cultural History of the Jews of Russia<br/>
in the 19th Century.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="center font09 pmb1">By</p>
    <p class="center font12 pmb1">Pauline Wengeroff.</p>
    <p class="center font09 pmb1">With a Foreword by <b>Dr. Gustav Karpeles</b>.</p>
    <p class="center">
      <b>Volume 1.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="center font09 pmb2">
      <b>Price, paperback M. 3.—.    Cloth-bound M. 4.—</b>
    </p>
    <p class="i14 font11">Press Reviews:</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Berliner Tageblatt.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">When one picks up the memoir of a Russian author
that deals with Russian conditions, one is predisposed
to read a Jobiad, in which everything is to be found except
joy and sunshine. This initial expectation increases
even more when it concerns Russian-Jewish conditions,
described by a Jewish author. But this time, we are
disappointed in the most wonderful and pleasant way. The work of
Pauline Wengeroff is so sunny and heartfelt that no reader will put it down
unsatisfied. In particular, the Jewish
reader will find rich joy in the warmhearted piety that ennobles
the entire book. The descriptions of Jewish holidays occupy
the broadest space; but they are so artistically presented and
underlaid with so much emotional warmth that one listens with deep emotion
to the old storyteller, as if she were everyone’s grandmother,
telling us wonderful fairy tales in atmospheric darkness;
fairy tales that we ourselves once saw and experienced
when we were young… The heart celebrates reminiscences during
this reading, and the soul laments all that we modern people
have lost in the struggle for a bitter life — everything that was deep and
heartfelt, and what once made life a serious holiday.
What a naive, soulful book, which has no other pretension
than to hold up to us the mirror of our own past. And
yet this memoir simultaneously provides a cultural portrait of incomparable
fidelity.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[222]" id="pgepubid00232">
        <a id="Seite_222" title="[222]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Vossische Zeitung, Berlin.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">A remarkable and, what is more, valuable
book are these memoirs written by an elderly woman, which, through
the conscientiousness and thoroughness with which the author, supported by an
astonishing memory, goes about her work,
provide a very valuable contribution to the cultural history of Russian
Jews during the middle of the last century. The reader
is introduced to family life as it unfolded in a wealthy
Jewish household at that time and gains, through the depiction that
forgets no detail, an insight into the way of life, constrained by a thousand
religious precepts, devoted solely to the study of the Talmud
and rejecting all secular education, even among the upper classes of orthodox Jews of that time. From
cradle to grave, during the numerous feast, mourning,
penitential, and fast days of the calendar year, the Jew had to be mindful of fulfilling
the countless precepts that the Talmud
imposed on him, and by which his eating and drinking, his clothing, his
waking and sleeping, his praying and celebrating, his joy and his
sorrow were regulated. What appears to the layman only as custom
also became morality for this spirited people.
Within the strict confines that subjected every human emotion
to control, the Jew was educated in piety and self-control.
The study of the Talmud accustomed them to
logical thinking, and the commonality of the numerous religious practices,
combined with the isolation of the Jews
from the surrounding Christian world, developed a family spirit of
intimacy, as rarely seen in any other people. Moving is the
description of the destruction of the author’s hometown,
the city of Brest in Lithuania, which occurred by order of Emperor Nicholas I,
and in its place a fortress was to be built. Even the dead
had to leave their final resting place. In the year 1838, it was like
the first inkling of a new era for the people living in ignorance and
strict formal faith, when the Russian government
undertook a thorough reform of schools and entrusted the task of
spreading Western European education among the Jews to the Minister
of Public Education and the scholar Dr. phil. Lilienthal. The depiction
contributes significantly to the value and appeal of the book.
Plain and simple, without rhetorical embellishment, without particular
pathos, the author describes customs and institutions, yet
she possesses to a high degree the gift of making experiences vivid
and of keenly interesting even the distant reader.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Frankfurter Zeitung.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">The author, whose youth falls in the thirties and forties
of the past century, draws a very vivid
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[223]" id="pgepubid00233"><a id="Seite_223" title="[223]"/></span>
picture of life and activity in a strictly religious Jewish
family, which was among the wealthiest in the city of Brest-Litovsk.
Already after reviewing the first pages, one gets the impression
that one is dealing with a photographically faithful, yet artistically
rounded reproduction of what was seen and experienced,
that, in a word, a cultural-historical document is at hand. Such
books are always worth reading. In this case, there is also the
special interest that the descriptions of the religious customs
of the Lithuanian Jews, the author’s co-religionists, which go into the finest details
and are by no means tiring, can offer. Significant is the chapter that deals with the beginning
of the Enlightenment period among Russian Jews. As
elsewhere, here too the emancipation of minds has brought with it
not only many joys but also its sufferings. The Enlightenment
has, as Dr. Karpeles says in his foreword, “pierced the mists
that had hitherto hung over Russian Jewry,”
but it has also brought the Jews, who until then, as it were, led a separate existence
like on an island in the midst of the Slavic ocean of peoples,
into contact with hostile and often morally inferior
elements. In the second volume, which will hopefully soon follow the
first, we may learn more about this.</p>
    <p class="font09"><b>Die Zeit.</b> Vienna.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“La Russie se recueille”, “Russia gathers itself”, as is well known,
Gorchakov said after the Crimean War. The same can be said of
Judaism, ever since it has been displaced from public life
on all sides. It is true that wealthy Jews still find entry
into aristocratic circles when their money is needed, and one
even enters into a misalliance with them when it comes to freshly gilding
a faded noble coat of arms. Also, “liberal-minded”
Germans tolerate the votes of Jews in elections.
But across the board, it is said: “Don’t greet me under
the linden trees!” The backlash of this displacement manifests itself among
Jews in their introspection, in an increased cultivation
of their memoir literature and an increased depiction of the past
of Judaism, especially its inner life. Such a depiction
is present in the “Memoirs of a Grandmother”. It is an amiable
book that unpretentiously describes the domesticity and way of life of a wealthy
Russian Jew in Brest from the first quarter of the last
century. Over the household hangs the aura of patriarchal piety and ancestral
custom. From Sabbath to Sabbath, from holiday to holiday, the
household members, as if on bridges, overcome the hardships and
difficulties of the working days and maintain an elevated mood,
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[224]" id="pgepubid00234"><a id="Seite_224" title="[224]"/></span>
which is expressed in the intimacy of marital and family life, in strict child-rearing,
in hospitality and charity.
Here unfolds a richness of spiritual inspirations and
moral satisfactions, which was certainly capable of compensating for many bitter
experiences. There is also no lack of inner struggles,
brought about by the advent of German educational attempts and the changed
dress. The captivating description makes
the book both stimulating and instructive reading.</p>
    <p class="i14 font09">Vienna.</p>
    <p class="ir3 font09">Chief Rabbi Dr. M. <em class="gesperrt">Güdemann</em>.</p>
    <p class="p1 font09">
      <b>Pester Lloyd.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">“I ask the readers for indulgence. I am not a writer
and do not wish to appear as one. I only ask that these notes
be regarded as the work of an old woman who, lonely in
the quiet twilight of her solitary life’s evening, simply recounts
what she experienced and learned in an eventful time.” Truly,
any attempt at objective criticism and appreciation of this book
would be a blasphemy. As long as we are under the spell of the reading,
the consideration does not even occur to us whether these
pages have any literary justification from a purely artistic standpoint,
and even when we have long put the book down,
we feel only a sense of reverent
gratitude for this sensitive grandmother, who so generously
allows us to partake in the rich treasure of her refined life experiences.
With loving, careful female hands,
Pauline Wengeroff unfolds cheerful and serious, but always
equally colorful genre pictures from Jewish family life;
pictures, each of which captivates our heart with its peculiar, strict
charm, but which then, in their entirety,
round into an imposing cultural painting. What the spirited
elderly woman recounts about the emancipation of Lithuanian Jews truly
strikes us as a fairy tale from grandmother’s dear storytelling lips;
but a very modern fairy tale, permeated by the fate-laden
fiery spirit of our time. With magical speed,
the dawn of a new era displaces the mists of the ghetto.
Many a lovely image that could only thrive in the twilight must
give way to the merciless brightness. But however numerous the sacrifices
of the transitional period may have been, the place in the sun was
not bought too dearly by the Jews. Painfully sweet it must be for
this grandmother to delve into these joyful and sorrowful memories.
It is truly heroic, in any case, to spread these delicate blossoms of the heart
before the large, jaded crowd. But even if
only a few should be found for whom a refreshing fragrance from these yellowed
pages penetrates to the deepest soul, then
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[225]" id="pgepubid00235"><a id="Seite_225" title="[225]"/></span>
these few will await the grandmother’s further reminiscences
all the more eagerly.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Daily Entertainment Sheet of the Posen Latest News.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">To the hitherto very isolated memoir works of Jewish
literature, a work is now added here that allows us a deep, characteristic
insight into the great transitional period of the Enlightenment
among the Jews of Lithuania. Pauline Wengeroff is
one of the first to reveal this cultural treasure to us, and she does so
with such heartfelt love and piety, with such rare fidelity and truthfulness,
with gentle humor and fine psychological tact, that
one follows her amiable descriptions with the greatest interest.
Once this first volume has been read, one will look forward to the second
with all the more eager anticipation.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Entertainment Sheet of the Franconian Courier.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">Jewish literature possesses very few memoir works.
From Jewish life in Russia, only one, the
“Zapiski Jewreja” by Gregor Isaakovich Bogrov, is likely known.
To this work, which has opened up a deep and characteristic insight into
the life and activities of Jews in Russia at the beginning of the last
century, the memoirs of Pauline
Wengeroff are equally matched. With heartfelt love and great piety, with
rare fidelity and sincere truthfulness, with a gentle,
transfiguring humor and fine psychological tact, she recounts
important episodes from a great transitional period, from the time
in which the Enlightenment among the Jews in Russia began
to break through the mists that had hitherto hung over Russian Jewry.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Essen People’s Newspaper.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">It is a book that presents to us, in a broad, comfortable form, the life
of the Jews in the city of Brest in Lithuania. The author
looks back seventy years, and she has even retained the impressions
from her earliest childhood with admirable accuracy in her
memory. The present volume describes the time when the
Jews could still live undisturbed according to their old customs and traditions and
in their own attire in Russia, as well as the beginning
of the reform work initiated by the government. A multitude
of characteristic individual traits from the life of this people are found
here recorded with conscientious care. These are very peculiar
little cultural pictures that will also be of value to researchers
and in which, incidentally, connoisseurs of Jewish jargon will also find
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[226]" id="pgepubid00236"><a id="Seite_226" title="[226]"/></span>
a rich harvest. Particularly appealing to us are the descriptions
of the comfortable, closely circumscribed family life of these old-style Jews,
this strong cohesion of the individual family members,
of parents and children, even when they themselves were already married.
Everyone who has read the first part of these interesting and also formally
well-rounded memoirs will look forward to the continuation
with anticipation.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Breslau Newspaper.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">Rarely have such powerful changes occurred in a
segment of the population in a short time as among the Russian Jews
of Lithuania; for centuries, as if motionless, like a picture
remaining still, a tremendous transformation suddenly took place there
and created changes like a thunderstorm. The interest
in this corner of unculture and culture has become general,
and especially the persecutions to which Russian Jews were subjected
caused the eyes of the whole world to turn to those
regions. It is therefore particularly interesting when a book
introduces us to descriptions that have not yet been touched by a breath
of modern times, and yet we find there a wealth of
interesting facts, of imagination, poetic talent, peculiar
education, and strange conditions. One will therefore read the book
“Memoirs of a Grandmother” with great interest and
let it affect them like an interesting old painting.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>East and West, Berlin.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">A book of memories. We have all experienced these quiet twilight hours
of Sabbath afternoons ourselves. And our children’s eyes glowed
as they looked at grandmother, and grandmother’s
dreams entered our souls like wondrous hosts of heroes.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Not as an experience: — but as a dream-image full of pale, mild
colors, full of melancholic twilight glow, the past connects to
the present. And so the past always appears to us so rich in peace,
even when it was stormy, and the blue flower of
Romanticism blooms on the spot where an ancestor’s foot trod…</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">A grandmother tells of old life, and a world of
stillness, idyllic narrowness, and a soul-liberating boundedness
rises before us. But it would sink again. The grandchildren
grow up, and from grandmother’s stories, only sweet,
incorporeal memory remains. The word vanishes. Only the melody remains.
Chords, —</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">A Sabbath late afternoon… Secretly and stealthily
shy sunbeams glide through the dense network of curtains
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[227]" id="pgepubid00237"><a id="Seite_227" title="[227]"/></span>
and draw dull-bright, strangely branched, intertwined lines on
the dark dining table.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">In a corner, grandmother sits in her armchair, and the
grandchildren crowd around her, and the twilight envelops them with a dense, dark
veil…</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother tells of distant days; of people who are far
away, far, far, where G-d’s silent heavens lie; of a life
that has long since died.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother tells: A sweet comfort makes every word well up;
blissful memories rise smilingly; and a gentle
sorrow softly floods around the sunken past and softens the
words into quiet resignation.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother tells: And sighs creep through the darkness.
And the children listen and listen. It is like a fairy tale…</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Jews do not lack a sense for past events. The
compulsion of the days, the yoke of today, always kept souls captive.
The grandmothers, who whisper their prayers in the narrow rooms,
guarded — free from the drudgery of the struggle for existence — the
treasure of memories. And if only they had all written down the stories
to which their grandchildren listened in the twilight of Sabbath afternoons,
the history of our people would lie before us, firmly structured and
glowing with an atmospheric magic that no historian
will ever be able to convey.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">The word was nimble. But the hand was weak and withered…
And so death carried the past into the grave along with its guardians.
It is not what once was and what once happened that
forms the intimate charm of history. That may be the concern of the
crouching chronicler, who, like a greedy usurer, strings together
and stacks individual pieces. In events
and human destinies, we seek the individual destiny. We
know the effects of great events as compact magnitudes;
and the philosopher will derive from these values the path of history,
the direction of development, from the confusion of effective
factors the regularity, from all the brutalities of struggling powers
the meaning, the spirit of history. But veiled from us are
the individual small components of the history-making forces:
how the individual human influences history and how he is influenced
by historical development. For an individual is a taker and
giver, at once creator and creature, master builder and building block,
subject and object of history. Into this
wondrous power of becoming, of changing, of eternal transformation
microscopic historical research allows us to look.
This “devotion to the small” — as Grimm called it — creates
and internalizes the consecration for G-d’s mighty step in
history. The sun reflects itself in the smallest dewdrops and
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[228]" id="pgepubid00238"><a id="Seite_228" title="[228]"/></span>
gigantic epochs of the past in the soul of the humblest
contemporary. From these insights, the sense for
family research has gradually arisen, the interest in correspondence
between people of earlier generations, the delight in memoirs
… “Grandmother tells…“</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Newer Jewish literature is poor in such thoughtful
memories, and it can hardly be otherwise. Family research!
How can family research stimulate curiosity where, in
our community, anxious shyness seeks to break the chain of generations?
Everyone wants to be an autochthon — grown
from the earth, formed by their own strength. We do not
yet have the courage to speak of the patient martyr-strength of our ancestors,
nor the sense to praise the quiet beauty of their confined
existence. Who would want to research the life of their great-ancestor,
who trudged from village to village with a pack on his back, trading
old clothes — and yet was a complete human being: merciless
towards himself, because the knowledge of G-d’s mercy was within him
… We do not yet have the strength of a firmly rooted personality
to despise the cheap wit that the fool might make about the miserable,
forced external life of our ancestors. We do not yet dare
to say aloud that they only seemed like servants and were free
people who, in hardship and wandering misery, strove to become
worthy of the grace of being created in the image of G-d. We
have not yet emancipated ourselves from the arrogance of those who have just
been civilly emancipated, to smile at the customs and traditions of our ancestors, at
their ideas and thoughts. We have not yet overcome the phrase
— the phrase that exposes all our poverty:
Modern people. With this phrase, we want to sever the iron
bond that ties us to our ancestors. We imagine —
and yet it is but a straw in a child’s hand.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Grandmother tells.” Of her world! How far we would be,
if only we could wander through her times with grandmother
without anxiously looking around with prejudice. She kindly takes
us by the hand and leads us: a small town, a low house,
even with a proper front porch — so a manor! — a
few crooked alleys, a dark cheder — and there one lives!</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">One lives there!…</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“A Year in the Parental Home.” We wander from festival to festival.
And the gray everyday becomes light, because it is a prelude to the festivals.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">What is actually the goal of our life? The holiday.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Our whole life is just a waiting for the coming day
of celebration.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">But our waiting is full of pain and impatience, tormenting.
Our hope is confused and wildly driving, debilitating in the fear
    <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[229]" id="pgepubid00239"><a id="Seite_229" title="[229]"/></span>
of languishing halfway: When will the hour of celebration come to us?
Perhaps it will never come to us.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother smiles: You poor things. First, one looks forward to the Sabbath all week. One doesn’t need to worry: Will it come? Will it not?! It comes! When the Sabbath comes, rest comes. And whoever truly celebrates the Sabbath doesn’t even know that there’s an everyday life. We sanctify the Sabbath, we believe. But the Sabbath sanctifies us. It consecrates our life and activities; and eating and drinking become divine service. And so, already on Friday — the gatekeeper of the hours of rest — the gentle afterglow of the Sabbath falls. Work on Friday doesn’t tire the hand. The earthly burden is lifted from it. And good angels help with the work. That’s why the fish on Friday evening taste so delicious. They have the taste of — “that world” even if Father didn’t look around so worriedly in the kitchen and taste the sauce. Prayer, rest, and food — this triad intertwines into the harmony of the Sabbath. And when the day has come to an end, a meal again accompanies “Queen Sabbath” to her home.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">The same melody sings in all festivals — only the key changes and the rhythm. On Hanukkah, Grandmother lets us begin the journey through the whole year. She starts with the latkes — the honey pancakes. She stops with the obligatory tipsiness on Simchat Torah. Life oscillates between joy and sorrow. If sorrow threatens to constrict the soul too tightly, a holiday loosens the snares. And a day of mourning curbs the overflowing cheerfulness. Not observed calendrically-externally, but accepted in their specific character, lived according to their emotional content, understood according to their conceptual content — the Jewish festivals act as a regulator of human activity. They resolve the confusion of our existence into peaceful harmonies and balance the stormy ups and downs into the gentle swell of a peacefully gliding life. And custom and tradition have wonderfully adapted to the meaning of the festivals.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother Wengeroff, in her memoirs — “the Ben-Sekunim,” the child of old age — has woven together with infinite love the wreath of many customs that adorn the festivals and — her work. If the old formal language of our folk customs should ever fall silent, the ethnologist and cultural historian will be able to reconstruct the life of the Jews in olden days from these pages. The domestic hearth — which stands in the kitchen — is the center of the family. What simmers and cooks there does not serve thoughtless hedonism and gluttony. The housewife does not begin her work until she has said a prayer and offered a sacrifice. The dishes are adapted to the festivals, and all ingredients are at the same time — symbols! Food and drink, which are meant to strengthen the body   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[230]" id="pgepubid00240"><a id="Seite_230" title="[230]"/></span> so that the soul, unhindered by earthly gravity, can take its flight upwards, are themselves only — animated matter. They are consecrated. And if the housewife was not almost crushed by the abundance of worries, duties, religious commandments, and the subtleties that custom has elevated to the compulsion of legal regulations, then only the thought of serving higher purposes, indeed the highest purpose, with all the painstaking work, could sanctify and ennoble the burden — and lift it out of the sphere of the physically exhausting — and elevate it.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">In this world centered on G-d and Judaism, lax convenience cannot obstruct the path of duties. The more faithfully the commandments are fulfilled, the lighter life is borne. The narrower the fence of laws, the brighter and freer the soul soars to G-d’s throne. And civil life unfolds together, like flight upwards. The individual does not sink into the community to the point of unrecognizability. Their individual worth is increased, their individual character developed by the community. In the fate of the individual, whatever phases from happiness to sorrow it may pass through, the threads of others’ destinies are interwoven. The living conditions of each individual Jew are those of other Jews. Everyone needs the other, for common prayer in the Chevra, during mourning, at meals, in the jokes of Purim, in the joy of the festival. And this interdependence in the needs of a higher life internalizes the bonds of inherited ethnicity and shared external destinies, creating a social covenant of a very specific character on a path far removed from materialistic socialism.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">An idyllic calm and the peace of a group of people united in their longings and their trust in G-d rested upon that generation. And even if we were to dissolve the halo that the old grandmother casts around her youth, and if we wanted to supplement in individual features what the reconciling and leveling forgetfulness of old age blurred, the basic lines of a lovely idyll would not lose their sharpness. The games of children and the contemplation of the elders fill only a small world; but it is full of fragrant dreams, full of deep relationships, and in every span personally conquered and entirely become personal possession. The day is infinitely long, so long that the usual measure of hours seems to have lost its validity. But the feeling and concept of boredom are unknown to anyone. There are no dead hours, because every hour has its own life. In the gray dawn, when the night barely thinks of the coming day, the Jews are already thinking of their day’s work. Who knows how work will gag the hours — so quickly grab the Talmud folio, which, still open from yesterday,   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[231]" id="pgepubid00241"><a id="Seite_231" title="[231]"/></span> impatiently awaits the “learner”; so quickly hurry to the Beth Hamidrash to recite the beloved Psalms in two-part harmony in the Chevra Tehillim.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Life is so short — and there is so much praying and learning. This thought must be passed on to the children. They cannot go to the Cheder early enough. In its narrowness and eternal twilight, a holy world grows. And the first Cheder visit thus becomes the true birthday — of the human soul. The poorest gives up his last possession so that his child does not spiritually starve. And it is a custom that exposes the entire Jewish soul, a custom of poignant depth and unspeakable intimacy, that the father, wrapped in a prayer shawl, carries the young Cheder boy to the Melammed… He shows him the radiant splendor of the heavens and teaches them to forge their path to G-d and to pave it with the blocks of holy letters. The goal is sunny. But the work is hard. Even the games in free time are still interwoven with the silk threads of the teaching that the semi-darkness of the Cheder spun. Early on, the child learns modesty. For the ghetto is a modest world. In muted tones, all the storm of souls fades away. All existence is full of mystery. And the anxiety and awe that the child felt when it once stood in the empty house of G-d before the holy Ark, it carries with it always, and they give it the quiet devotion when it will one day stand before the holy questions of life… Into this firmly structured world with its own education, with its shimmering richness of fantasy, with its closed worldview, into this world of dreams and mystically dimmed premonitions, into this world of clear days, of thoughtful work — now the new era stomps in clumsily with heavy feet! Can splendid seed immediately blossom from the trampled clods? People are too firmly established for the new era to be able to completely crumble them. They still laugh and mock it, and snatch its new gifts from its hand. Highways are being built. “As long as people remember, it took two days to travel from Brest to Bobruisk; now Reb Zimel Epstein comes and tells us he will shorten it to a one-day journey.” Who is he? G-d? Will he put the rest of the road in his pocket? And Reb Zimel Epstein is right. But what does it matter? Can’t one make the Sabbath evening brighter and more peaceful with lamps that burn brighter and more calmly than pine torches?… And can’t one remain an old Jew on new paths?… And yet: on new paths comes the new era! The world grows larger. The narrowness dissolves. The clumsy carts disappear. Carriages arrive, and soon, soon the steam horse will race through the forests. Every day brings new desires; and as the walls of the ghetto begin to waver   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[232]" id="pgepubid00242"><a id="Seite_232" title="[232]"/></span>, so do the children of the ghetto begin to waver. The quiet harmony is destroyed. They seem like drunkards, and we smile at their staggering gait. Enlightenment creeps into the houses via the back stairs. It darkens more than it enlightens — for it is an enlightenment of — the Russian government! Schiller’s Don Carlos lies on top of the Talmud volume, and Posa recites his editorials in the “Gemara-Niggun.” The youth want to deceive their parents with this. But they deceive themselves: Schiller would be incomprehensible to them if he were not “learned”… The parents fear the new era, and they implore the missionary of the Russian government’s enlightenment, Lilienthal, to declare by “the Sefer Torah” whether he intends to lead the Jews to baptism. They fear. But their fear is more a premonition of terrible developments. What they see around them makes them more puzzled than frightened. Here is a scene that delightfully depicts the pregnant times: Our grandmother’s brother-in-law was fascinated by natural science. At dawn, he had gone into the garden half-dressed. “His right hand worked vigorously, removing the bark of the poplar and extracting small insects, which my brother-in-law — not without disgust! — threw into a small box with a glass lid.” His mother had noticed him and called out, half-surprised, half-amused: “Wos tust du do?”</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Gur nischt,” he replied laconically.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Wos is do im Kästchen auf der Erd’?” the mother continued to ask.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Gur nischt,” the agitated natural scientist said.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Warum biste so früh do?” the mother inquired.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">“Früh! S’es gur nischt früh!” answered the young man, hoping to extricate himself from the situation this way… The mother leaned over the fence and, not without annoyance, discovered a book next to the box. She stepped closer. The natural scientist fled. My mother looked into the box and, to her indescribable astonishment, discovered an ordinary fly, a May beetle, a ladybug, an ant, a woodworm… She couldn’t believe her eyes, and her shrug indicated more than spoken words could have, pointing to the question: “Why does a person need such vermin?”</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">To the “vermin” that gnawed at the inner person, another misfortune was added. A government ukaz forbade Jewish attire: the outer person had to be reformed. Even the peyes, “which first give the Jew godliness,” were to disappear. There were bitter struggles with the enforcing police authorities. But heavier were the struggles in the souls of the Jews. The coat fell, and the duke had to follow it. The new attire did not lead the Jews into a new world. It only led them out of their old world. All deeper-seeing men felt this, and it made them sad and their powerlessness so unspeakably agonizing. When the graves   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[233]" id="pgepubid00243"><a id="Seite_233" title="[233]"/></span> of the old Brest cemetery were opened and the corpses had to leave their resting place because the city was being converted into a fortress, there was lamentation in the community — yet the dead found a resting place. But the souls that were dragged out of their quiet world, the soul of youth became homeless and had to wander into an uncertain world. The best became wavering. The weak became rootless. They changed their outer attire and became superficial.</p>
    <div class="poem">
      <div class="stanza">
        <span class="i0">
          <span class="font09">“Black skirts, silk stockings,</span>
        </span>
        <span class="i0">
          <span class="font09">White, polite cuffs,</span>
        </span>
        <span class="i0">
          <span class="font09">Gentle speeches, embracing —</span>
        </span>
        <span class="i0">
          <span class="font09">Oh! If only they had hearts.”</span>
        </span>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="ti6 font09">These are only the first beginnings of that new era, of which our grandmother speaks. With restrained words. She has spread all her intimacy over the old ghetto life, of which she, of course, gives us only a fraction. We get to know only one house with all its joys, excitements, and sorrows. It is a rich and distinguished house into which we enter as guests. And yet it is only a paradigm for the goings-on in the ghetto. For life in the patrician house, in its essence and form, is not elevated above the ghetto character.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Hut and manor house differ only in the crude externalities of life forms. Character and content of conceptual ideas, the scale of feelings, and the delicate needs of the soul: — perhaps an individual differentiation could be reflected therein. But never a social one! The rich are only granted the grace that they could bear the abundance of duties more easily and tirelessly. And their gratitude for this grace was that they observed the duties more meticulously and extended their circles!</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">In the house of the rich, Judaism did not crumble. Custom and conviction, deed and prayer, old age and youth stood side by side in beauty and undefiled by crude necessity, making the house a place of G-d…</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">Grandmother tells… And a world of beauty, peace, and rejuvenating cheerfulness rises before us. And a longing for the sunken land of the whole overwhelms us.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">After all the disappointments that civilization brings and which — the more sensitive and delicate we become — it will make us feel ever more bitterly, we look back into that quiet, defunct world, and in lonely hours a question gently stirs within us, whether the blue flower of Romanticism did not breathe its fragrances around people there.</p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">It was a narrow world. But it was high and reached up to the seventh heaven…</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[234]" id="pgepubid00244">
        <a id="Seite_234" title="[234]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">People were small. But their souls were full of harmony and unity. They did not languish in pleasure. Desire and strength, will and goal, life and teaching were but one. They gave the holy peace that could not even suspect that there was also disunity.</p>
    <p class="ir3 font09">
Dr. Th. <em class="gesperrt">Zlocisti</em>.</p>
    <p class="p1 font09">
      <b>General Newspaper of Judaism. Berlin.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09">A pensive “Once upon a time” resonates with gentle melancholy from the book of the sensitive author. Like a Rembrandt painting, we look into the appealing chiaroscuro of a bygone Jewish cultural period, and the stinging light of everyday life pains us when we close the book. For what the author so unpretentiously tells us from the past century is more than the life of a distinguished Jewish family in a Russian city; it is, in fact, a microcosm of good old-fashioned Judaism, a small painting full of intimate charm, which makes us modern Israelites, who consider ourselves so grand as “children of the world,” feel with pain how small we have become — because we no longer have our own culture. One might call the life of those Jews, which was nothing other than a wonderfully unfolding divine service from the beginning to the end of the year, limited in a certain sense; in its limitation, it shows mastery. The painting is something complete and whole, and we take away a comforting full impression. We may well welcome it in the sense of progress that the full light of European culture finally broke into the patriarchal twilight — but we also lament with the author the terrible destruction that the corrosive rays caused. How much Jewish art of living, poetry, and ethics has been laid to rest! — May Grandmother’s book, to which Dr. G. Karpeles has given a friendly foreword, not only be praised but also be read! It is not only intended for dear “grandchildren,” who, playfully, perhaps better than can happen in religious schools, are introduced to the charm and consecration of old Jewish life; it also offers adults an interesting contribution to the “revaluation of values” among our brethren in the neighboring empire. And finally, it will make every serious Jew thoughtful. For even if we must say with Koheleth: “Do not say, ‘How is it that the former times were better?’ for it is not from wisdom that you ask,” it nevertheless awakens a fervent desire for the inner uniformity and cohesion that the fathers knew, a longing for new Jewish cultural values.</p>
    <p class="ir3 font09">E. L.</p>
    <p>
      <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[235]" id="pgepubid00245">
        <a id="Seite_235" title="[235]"/>
      </span>
    </p>
    <p class="p1 font09">
      <b>Jewish Newspaper. Vienna.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">When one opens the book, one finds on the first page the author’s picture: an old, friendly face with wise, gentle eyes, which from the outset win one over for everything the author will say. In friendly words, a picture of Jewish life in a wealthy bourgeois house in the 1840s is now depicted. Everything is so immovably still and breathes intimacy, inner serenity, strong family spirit, and genuine humanity. Everything is so bright and lovely that one cannot banish the thought that the author unconsciously depicted it more beautifully than it truly was, that she surrounded her childhood days, which now pass before us, with the halo of poetry. One thing, however, we learn unequivocally from it: that the Jewish family life of that good old time was intimate and cozy, that the homes of the Jews at that time were cultural centers in the best sense of the word. The description of the transitional stage to the Haskalah seems less successful to us, as indeed the entire structure of the book reveals a flawed technique. Yet we do not wish to quarrel with the author about this, for the heartfelt tone of the book, which captivates our hearts like a fairy tale spell, compensates us more than amply. We wish the book the widest possible circulation among old and young. The book is especially recommended for young girls, for Jewish intimacy and Jewish family spirit are unfortunately dwindling, and this little book can contribute to making the future mothers of our people less modern, but more natural and Jewish.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Israelite Monthly Magazine, Breslau.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb1">Memoir literature has been fully recognized in recent years for its significance to historical science. From Jewish memoir works, whose number is already small, one can, however, expect only a meager yield for pragmatic history. For there were not too many personalities among the Jews who had a great share in active daily events, and among these, not many found the time and leisure to write down their memoirs. All the greater, however, is the gain that results from this literature for inner life and cultural history. In this sense and with this limitation, the advertised book is also to be regarded as a valuable source from which various lessons and insights into the life of our brethren in the East can be drawn. Where historical events are reported, such as in the depiction of the Enlightenment period, the value of these records is more than problematic;   <span class="x-ebookmaker-pageno" title="[236]" id="pgepubid00246"><a id="Seite_236" title="[236]"/></span> it is peculiar — to maintain the courtesy due to a lady — when the author repeatedly speaks of the “scholastic web” and the “many Talmudic subtleties” and thereby believes to provide her legitimacy for judging that so fateful epoch. (This also includes the statement that “many treatises of the Talmud begin with the words omar abaya”!). Where, on the other hand, the author limits herself to her preferred field of detailed painting and scenes from folk and family life, she delivers true cabinet pieces of this minor art, which no one will read without pleasure and benefit.</p>
    <p class="font09">
      <b>Israelite Family Journal, Hamburg.</b>
    </p>
    <p class="ti6 font09 pmb2 pmb3">These memoirs are among the most charming books that have appeared on the Jewish bookshelf in a long time. The grandmotherly and the Jewish aspects within them merge into a warm, intimate cordiality that completely replaces a dazzling, poetic presentation, which one should not expect from this work. However, we are also dealing with a cultural-historical gift of the very first rank. It faithfully and lovingly preserves in devotion and memory for posterity what is now already dying out: the truly Jewish home and community life of our Russian brethren. The assertion of a dryness and ossification of old Judaism, of spiritual darkness and slavery under the “Law,” melts before this depiction like snow before the sun. Whoever reads this book, which bears the stamp of truthfulness in every letter, must say that our grandfathers and grandmothers, who lived in such a round, Jewish year, permeated by festivals and wonderful Jewish events, were happy. Despite all external pressure, despite their simplicity and unfamiliarity with modern culture. From this book, we learn to love many things again that we have already smiled at. Especially for our women, it can be a revelation.</p>
    <p class="center pmb3">Printed by C. Schulze &amp; Co., G. m. b. H., Gräfenhainichen.</p>
    <p class="break"/>
    <hr class="chap"/>
    <div class="pmb3"> </div>
    <div class="footnotes">
      <h3 id="pgepubid00247">Footnotes:</h3>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_1_1"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_1_1" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> “Die Welt” 1900.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_2_2"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_2_2" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Of these two brothers, one became a Bible scholar who published the following works: “<em class="gesperrt">The Religion of Ancient Israel</em> according to the fundamental principles contained in the Bible,” presented by <em class="gesperrt">Israel Sack</em>. (Leipzig and Berlin 1885. Published by Wilhelm Friedrich, Royal Court Bookseller.)
</p>
        <p>
“<em class="gesperrt">The Ancient Jewish Religion</em> in Transition from Biblicalism to Talmudism” by <em class="gesperrt">Israel Sack</em>. (Berlin 1889. Publishing house of <em class="gesperrt">Ferd. Dümmler</em>.)
</p>
        <p>
“<em class="gesperrt">Monistic View of G-d and the World.</em> An attempt at an idealistic foundation of monism on the basis of reality.” (<em class="gesperrt">Leipzig</em> 1899. Published by Wilhelm Engelmann.)</p>
        <p>The other brother, Gregor Syrkin (stepbrother), is an outstanding expert in the Hebrew language and literature. He wrote a small work titled: Chesjaunaus Lajlo — Dream Images.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_3_3"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_3_3" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> Sarwerke — a woman who serves in better Jewish homes during festivities, preparing sweets, jams, preserves.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_4_4"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_4_4" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> The small town played a role in the history of Little Russia. It was the residence of Hetman Mazepa.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_5_5"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_5_5" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[5]</span></a> The groom’s parents and relatives.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_6_6"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-0.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_6_6" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[6]</span></a> A place in Poland where a saint lives, known by the name “the grandfather from Spale.”</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_7_7"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_7_7" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[7]</span></a> Malakoff-kurgan (redoubt). At the instigation of General Malakoff, countless thousands of sacks were filled with sand and used to build a redoubt by laying them closely together in squares. The cannonballs that flew over from the enemy camp got stuck in the sacks.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_8_8"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_8_8" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[8]</span></a> In that happy time, plans for the equal rights of Jews were also prepared.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_9_9"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_9_9" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[9]</span></a> As head of a Talmud school.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_10_10"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_10_10" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[10]</span></a> The novel also appeared in German under the title “Thamar.” A disgraceful literary theft. The translator S. Mandelkern published the work under his own name. But he further exaggerated the audacity by dedicating the novel to Mapu, the actual author!</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_11_11"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_11_11" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[11]</span></a> A hashish user.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_12_12"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_12_12" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[12]</span></a> Lunar eclipse.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_13_13"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_13_13" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[13]</span></a> no comfort.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_14_14"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_14_14" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[14]</span></a> Conscription.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_15_15"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_15_15" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[15]</span></a> Soul.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_16_16"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_16_16" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[16]</span></a> G-d.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_17_17"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_17_17" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[17]</span></a> Offense.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_18_18"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_18_18" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[18]</span></a> Soldier’s bread.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_19_19"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_19_19" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[19]</span></a> Woolen fabric sewn with linen.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_20_20"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_20_20" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[20]</span></a> To distance oneself, to hold back.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_21_21"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_21_21" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[21]</span></a> Regulations.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_22_22"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_22_22" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[22]</span></a> Choice.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_23_23"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_23_23" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[23]</span></a> Forgiveness.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_24_24"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_24_24" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[24]</span></a> Sins.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_25_25"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_25_25" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[25]</span></a> Resigned to G-d’s will.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_26_26"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_26_26" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[26]</span></a> Those who deliver the soldiers to the government.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_27_27"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_27_27" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[27]</span></a> He who accepts the soldiers.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_28_28"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_28_28" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[28]</span></a> To faint.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_29_29"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_29_29" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[29]</span></a> Tumult.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_30_30"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_30_30" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[30]</span></a> Milk and honey.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_31_31"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_31_31" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[31]</span></a> Command.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_32_32"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_32_32" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[32]</span></a> Commander.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_33_33"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_33_33" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[33]</span></a> Away, gone!</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_34_34"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_34_34" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[34]</span></a> The High Holy Days.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_35_35"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_35_35" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[35]</span></a> Horn.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_36_36"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-1.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_36_36" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[36]</span></a> Exile.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_37_37"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_37_37" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[37]</span></a> Two scholars who represented opposing views: Hillel — the mild, lenient; Shammai — the strict.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_38_38"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_38_38" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[38]</span></a> Lamentations on Tisha B’Av.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="footnote">
        <p><a id="Footnote_39_39"/><a href="6598946804666338120_46307-h-2.htm.xhtml#FNanchor_39_39" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[39]</span></a> Ancestral pride.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p class="pmb3"/>
    <div/>
  </body>
</html>
